AgroXAI: Explainable AI-Driven Crop
Recommendation System for Agriculture 4.0
¨Ozlem TURGUT
Department of Computer Engineering
Pamukkale University
Denizli, Turkey
Email: oturgut19@posta.pau.edu.tr
˙Ibrahim K ¨OK
Department of AI and Data Engineering
Ankara University
Ankara, Turkey
Email: ikok@ankara.edu.tr
Suat ¨OZDEM˙IR
Department of Computer Engineering
Hacettepe University
Ankara, Turkey
Email: ozdemir@cs.hacettepe.edu.tr
Abstract—Today, crop diversification in agriculture is a critical
issue to meet the increasing demand for food and to improve
food safety and quality. This issue is considered to be the
most important challenge for the next generation of agriculture
due to diminishing natural resources, limited arable land and
unpredictable climatic conditions caused by climate change.
In this paper, we employ emerging technologies such as the
Internet of Things (IoT), machine learning (ML) and explainable
artificial intelligence (XAI) to improve operational efficiency and
productivity in the agricultural sector. Specifically, we propose an
edge computing-based explainable crop recommendation system,
AgroXAI, which suggests suitable crops for a region based on
weather and soil conditions. In this system, we provide local
and global explanations of ML model decisions with methods
such as ELI5, LIME, SHAP, which we integrate into ML
models. More importantly, we provide regional alternative crop
recommendations with the Counterfactual explainability method.
In this way, we envision that our proposed AgroXAI system will
be a platform that provides regional crop diversity in the next
generation agriculture.
Index Terms—Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI), Agri-
culture 4.0, Internet of Things, edge computing, crop recommen-
dation
I. INTRODUCTION
Today, global climate change, population growth, agricul-
tural land depletion and biodiversity loss pose serious en-
vironmental, social and economic threats [1]. Under these
globally changing conditions, industrial growth and produc-
tion methods based on sustainable agricultural principles are
needed to meet the increasing demand for food and im-
prove food security and quality [2]. At this point, ensuring
crop diversity in agriculture stands out as a critical issue.
Crop diversification is the process of adding a new crop,
a different variety, to a field [3]. It is not only mitigates
various agricultural challenges such as soil degradation, pest
infestation, and climate change impacts, but also enhances
farm resilience, fosters income growth on small holdings,
stabilizes commodity prices, improves soil health, and offers a
diverse range of nutritious food options for both humans and
livestock [4]. In this context, ensuring regional crop diversity
based on low-cost digital technologies, in response to changing
environmental and climate conditions, emerges as a key area
of focus for agriculture 4.0 [5]. In particular, it is necessary
to periodically monitor the soil, air, and environmental factors
in distributed geographic regions and provide suitable crop
alternatives accordingly.
The concept of the Internet of Things (IoT), which provides
technology-oriented creative solutions to the current needs
in the new agricultural era, comes to the forefront [6], [7].
IoT offers innovative digital solutions in many areas based
on low-cost, low-latency approaches such as edge and fog
computing that respond to end-user needs on-site [8]. Many
of these solutions are also being used effectively in agriculture
domain. In this context, a wide variety of IoT-supported smart
agriculture applications are implemented in crop management,
soil management, water management, livestock management,
green management, weather management, and tracking and
tracing [9], [10]. It is observed that these applications are
becoming widespread with AI support, but there is also a
growing need for interpretability and explainability for the
effective use of these technologies. In this regard, Explainable
Artificial Intelligence (XAI) plays a crucial role in agriculture
by enhancing the transparency of AI-driven recommendations,
such as those for crop selection, soil health, and pest man-
agement [11]. By clarifying how environmental factors, soil
properties, and climate conditions shape AI suggestions, XAI
builds trust in technological solutions and supports data-driven
decision-making. This interpretability is essential for sus-
tainable agricultural practices, allowing stakeholders to make
informed choices that enhance resilience and productivity amid
changing environmental conditions.
Specifically, the existing research efforts related to crop
prediction in the agriculture domain are as follows.
Sharma et al. [12] developed a crop prediction model based
on Gaussian Naive Bayes, Decision Tree, Logistic Regression,
Random Forest, and XGBoost models. The authors developed
their models by training them on data collected from different
agricultural fields in India. The forecasting system based on
the developed models was enabled to be used online and
offline via an Android application. Similarly, Doshi et al.
[13] developed an intelligent recommendation system called
AgroConsultant to help farmers in India make an intelligent
decision on which crop to grow depending on various envi-
ronmental and geographical factors. In the developed system,
the authors presented a system design that combines data
sets showing soil, climate and precipitation characteristics and
arXiv:2412.16196v1  [cs.LG]  16 Dec 2024
decides which crop farmers will grow by using Decision Tree,
K-Nearest Neighbour, Random Forest, regression and Neural
Network models.
Rajak et al. [14] aimed to design a crop recommendation
system using an ensemble learning model based on Support
Vector Machine, Naive Bayes, Multi-layer Perceptron and
Random Forest models. The proposed system was tested
with soil dataset collected from different sources. Rule-based
output was produced with the ensemble model used in the
system. Similarly, Pudumalar et al. [15] aimed to design a
highly accurate and effective crop recommendation system
using ensemble techniques. They applied the majority voting
technique in Random Forest, CHAID, K-Nearest Neighbour
and Naive Bayes learners. In this study, soil testing lab
and crop data available in online sources were used as a
dataset. As a result of the applied model, they created a
rule. Saranya et al. [16] developed a crop recommendation
module that ensembles the results of Support Vector Machine,
Random Forest, Naive Bayes, and K-Nearest Neighbor models
using majority voting. In addition, they designed a web-based
interface called TILLAGE that includes fertilizer recommen-
dation and pesticide recommendation modules based on the
CNN model. The proposed modular solution aims to increase
agricultural production by improving soil use, fertilization and
crop selection.
Unlike the above studies, edge computing architecture and
Deep Reinforcement learning (DRL) learning-based methods
have been used in the architectural design and product man-
agement of smart agriculture applications. For example; Wang
[17] aimed to design an edge-cloud computing-based smart
agriculture system using DRL. This system consists of an
agricultural data collection layer, edge computing layer, data
transmission layer, and cloud computing layer. While data is
collected from various sensors placed in the agricultural data
collection layer, DRL is deployed in the cloud computing
layer for instant smart decision-making. In another study,
Alonso et al. [18] proposed an architecture called Global
Edge Computing Architecture (GECA) to realize Edge-IoT
applications. In this architecture, they developed SDN/NFV
capabilities and a Double Deep-Q Learning model to control
virtual data flows. Din et al. [19] focused on the problem
of monitoring crop health in a semi-structured farm. For this
problem, a non-uniform area coverage algorithm based on the
Double Deep Q-Network (DDQN) algorithm was developed.
On the other hand, studies on the explainability of smart
agriculture practices have been quite limited. Sabrina et al.
[20] designed an ML and fuzzy logic-based smart agriculture
system aiming to increase crop production. The system is
based on SVR, KNN and Naive Bayes models to monitor
soil properties, and weather conditions, and detect possible
abnormal conditions for the target crop. In the paper, an
approach based on fuzzy rules is presented to ensure user trust
and interoperability. In a similar study, Cartolano et al. [21] fo-
cused on crop recommendation and effective feature extraction
based on explainable ML methods in smart agriculture. They
applied Extreme Gradient Boosting, Multi-layer Perceptron,
and SVR models on the crop recommendation database. In
these models, they obtained visualization with various graph-
ics using SHAP and LIME, which are explainable artificial
intelligence methods.
Considering the existing gaps and shortcomings in the liter-
ature, in this work we present an explainable and interpretable
decision support system based on IoT edge computing in the
agricultural domain. The key contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows.
• We propose a XAI based crop recommendation system
called AgroXAI that provides a dynamic regional crop
diversity.
• We introduce a conceptual IoT architecture to operate the
proposed system at the edge based on an edge computing
approach.
• We also provide SHAP, LIME and ELI5 based post-hoc
explainability of why the preferred crop is planted for an
agricultural area.
This paper is structured as follows: Section II explains the
proposed crop recommendation system model, used ML mod-
els and XAI methods. Section III presents experimental result
of ML models and discusses the XAI method results. Section
IV provides a comprehensive discussion of security, privacy,
ethical considerations, economic feasibility of the model and
local preferences. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. AN EDGE COMPUTING-BASED EXPLAINABLE CROP
RECOMMENDATION SYSTEM (AGROXAI)
In this section, we introduce the proposed system model for
crop recommendation system and used ML and XAI methods.
A. System Model
Next generation agriculture aims to make agricultural pro-
duction more efficient, sustainable and predictable through
technologies such as digitalization, automation and artificial
intelligence. With this new vision of agriculture, data-driven
decision-making processes will enable farmers to make more
informed and region-specific crop choices. However, due to
differences in climate, soil structure, water resources, temper-
ature and humidity in different regions, there is a need for
low-cost and effective decision support systems that can make
localized decisions at the most extreme regional level. There-
fore, in this study, we propose a data-driven and AI-supported
crop recommendation system that will make regional crop
selection more effective at the edge close to the end user.
Specifically, the proposed system shown in Figure 1 is based
on a conceptual IoT architecture consisting of physical layer,
edge layer, fog layer and cloud layer.
• Physical Layer: This layer includes sensors that measure
the region’s climate, soil structure, water resources, tem-
perature and humidity, and actuators that provide condi-
tions that can be changed in the region. In this way, it will
be possible to periodically measure the current conditions
for crop forecasting and change the environment when
necessary.
Crop
Prediction
Features to adjust for the alternative crop
Post-hoc
Explainability
Methods
Counterfactual
Explainability
(Crop Recommendations)
Black Box 
Models
XAI
Methods
Edge Layer
Physical 
Layer
Raspberry Pi
Raspberry Pi
Fog Server
Fog Server
Fog Server
Fog Server
Fog Layer
Raspberry Pi
Cloud Layer
Weather  & Soil 
Data
Actual Instance
Lentil
Counterfactual 1
Maize
Counterfactual 2
Jute
Counterfactual 3
Mungbean
Fig. 1: Proposed Edge Computing-Based Explainable Crop Recommendation System (AgroXAI)
• Edge Layer: At this layer, for each geographic region,
there are end devices to analyze the locally collected
data. these devices are capable of running classical ML
and XAI methods (such as Raspberry Pi). Regionally,
the edge devices are tasked with taking the data in their
coverage area, predicting the appropriate crops for each
region and providing an explanation of the prediction
results. The ML models and XAI methods used in this
study operate at this layer.
• Fog Layer: This layer includes hardware clouds that
manage data traffic between the edge and the cloud layer
and have the potential to provide network control.
• Cloud Layer: This layer includes resource-rich network
devices that can perform computation and storage tasks
that cannot be performed on edge systems in the proposed
architecture. In particular, it collects all agricultural data
in one center and provides batch analysis when needed.
In the physical layer of AgroXAI, farmers in each geographical
region will be able to collect regional conditions at the time
of planting crops with IoT sensors and see the most suitable
crops to be planted according to ML and XAI results on edge
devices. When needed, the obtained information can be stored
on the fog server or cloud server and stored on central servers.
B. ML Models
In this paper, we used K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Ran-
dom Forest (RF), Decision Tree (DT), Support Vector Machine
(SVM), LightGBM (LGBM) and Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)
models to classify the crop. Table I shows the parameters used
in the training of these models.
1) KNN: KNN, which is based on the distance between
data points, is used to solve classification and regression
problems. It uses the nearest ”k” pieces of data to decide which
class the data belongs to. The success of KNN is determined
by the number of neighbors (k) and the distance calculation
algorithm used [22].
2) RF: RF is an ensemble approach. A forest is made up
of many independent decision tree classifiers. Changing the
attribute choices at random instead of the training examples is
the main concept. Every tree in the forest generates a result
by doing its own assessment. Each tree votes, and the value
with the highest score is chosen [22].
3) DT: DT is a model that predicts by learning simple
rules extracted from data features, represented by a tree
representation. Instances are ordered from root to leaf node.
Each node in the tree indicates a feature of the instance to be
tested. Based on the tested features, the path from the root to
a leaf node leads to the class label. The overfitting problem in
DT can be encountered. Pruning can be applied to solve this
problem [23] .
4) SVM: SVM is a method for classifying both linear and
non-linear data. In this method, data are classified into pre-
defined classes with the help of a hyperplane. In determining
the hyperplane, margins and support vectors, which are data
points close to the hyperplane, are used [22].
5) LGBM: LGBM is a type of histogram-based boosting
method. It is capable of rapidly processing big datasets [24]. It
TABLE I: ML Model Parameters
Model
Training Parameters
Best Parameters
KNN
n neighbours: (10-50), metric: (‘euclidian’, ‘cityblock’)
n neighbours: 11, metric: ‘cityblock’
RF
max depth: (5-10), n estimators: (10-150), criterion: (‘gini’, ‘entropy’)
max depth: 9, n estimators: 89, criterion: ‘entropy’
DT
max depth: (10-150), criterion: (’gini’, ‘entropy’),
splitter: (‘best’, ‘random’), min samples split: [ 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12]
max depth: 131, criterion: ‘gini’,
splitter: ‘best’, min samples split: 4
SVM
kernel: ‘rbf’,
C: [0.001, 1], gamma: [0.01, 0.1]
kernel: ‘linear’,
C: [0.001,0.01, 0.1]
kernel: ‘linear’
C: 0.01
LGBM
num leaves: (5-20), learning rate: [0.1, 0.01, 0.001],
n estimators: (10-50)
num leaves: 5, learning rate: 0.1, n estimators: 43
MLP
activation: (‘tanh’, ‘relu’), learning rate: (‘constant’, ‘adaptive’),
solver: (‘sgd’, ‘adam’), alpha: [0.0001, 0.001,0.1,0.2,0.3,0.4,0.5],
hidden layer sizes: [(10,10),(10,20), (10,30),
(10,40),(10,30,10),(10, 30, 50, 25)]
activation: ‘relu’, learning rate: ‘constant’,
solver: ‘adam’, alpha: 0.5,
hidden layer sizes: (10, 30, 50, 25)
uses the leaf-wise strategy, one of the methods used in learning
decision trees. This strategy allows an unbalanced tree to grow
and aims to split the leaf with the most loss. In this way, the
loss is minimized [25].
6) MLP: MLP is a simple feedforward neural network and
basically consists of three layers. The first layer is the input
layer, which accepts incoming signals and then passes them
on to neurons in the hidden layer. Calculations are performed
in the hidden layer. There may be one hidden layer, or there
could be multiple hidden layers. The last layer, the output
layer, accepts the output signals from the hidden layer and
creates the output pattern of the network [23].
C. Explainable AI Methods
In the classification process, not only is it important for
models to achieve high accuracy, but the interpretability of
the models’ decisions is also of critical importance. Providing
interpretability in these developed systems emerges as a factor
that enhances trust in the model decisions [26]. Therefore, in
this study, we employ IML methods such as ELI5, LIME,
SHAP, and Counterfactual.
1) Explain Like I’m 5 (ELI5): ELI5 is a Python package
used for the explainability of black box models. It provides
both global and local explainability. ELI5 uses tree models for
calculating feature weights. The contribution of the feature to
the decision is based on how much the score has changed from
parent to child at each node of the tree. [27]
2) SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP): SHAP is an
explainability method based on game theory. In this method, a
value called Shapley value is calculated for each feature, which
expresses the contribution of the feature to the outcome. Shap
provides both local and global explanation [28].
3) Local
Interpretable
Model-agnostic
Explanations
(LIME): LIME method examines how the model works by
changing the inputs and observing how the predictions vary.
LIME is model-agnostic and provides local explanations [29].
4) Counterfactual: Counterfactual is a human-friendly ex-
plainability method that explains the smallest change in feature
values and transforms the prediction into a predefined output.
Although a counterfactual tries to generate feature values
as close as possible to the corresponding instance, it is not
always possible to find a counterfactual for every predefined
prediction [28].
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND EVALUATION
A. Dataset Information
In this paper, we use the agriculture dataset available in
Kaggle [30]. The dataset contains 2200 rows of data and seven
features. The features are presented in Table II. In addition,
the dataset contains 22 different crop types as target labels.
These crops are apple, banana, blackgram, chickpea, coconut,
TABLE II: Dataset Features and Descriptions
Features
Descriptions
Nitrogen
Amount of Nitrogen in soil
Phosphorus
Amount of Phosphorus in soil
Potassium
Amount of Potassium in soil
Temperature
The average soil temperatures
Humidity
Amount of humidity
ph
pH level of the soil
Rainfall
Amount of rainfall
Target
Types of crop
coffee, cotton, grapes, jute, kidney beans, lentil, maize, mango,
moth beans, mungbean, muskmelon, orange, papaya, pigeon
peas, pomegranate, rice and watermelon.
B. ML Results and Evaluation
We tested all used models with the best parameters in
Table I and obtained the results in Table III. When comparing
classification models based on precision, recall, F1 score, and
accuracy, all models show strong performance with an overall
value above 95%. In particular, RF outperforms the others
with outstanding precision, recall, F1 score, and accuracy
reaching 99.24%. The DT follows closely behind with a
balanced performance with an accuracy of 98.48%. KNN,
SVM, LGBM, and MLP also show strong performances,
reaching over 95% accuracy. The success of RF here may
be due to combining multiple decision trees and mitigating
overfitting through random sampling, which tends to provide
robust generalization.
TABLE III: Classification Results of ML Models
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
Accuracy
KNN
97.1071
96.6667
96.6198
96.6667
RF
99.3395
99.2424
99.2312
99.2424
DT
98.5620
98.4848
98.4742
98.4848
SVM
97.7694
97.4242
97.4163
97.4242
LGBM
97.7930
97.5758
97.5527
97.5758
MLP
95.7698
95.6061
95.5945
95.6061
C. XAI Results and Evaluation
We used ELI5, SHAP, and Counterfactual explainability
methods to explain ML models developed for crop diversity. In
this context, we first used ELI5 and SHAP methods for local
and global explanation of the decisions of the most successful
ML models RF and LGBM models. Then, we determined the
crop varieties to be grown in the relevant region using the
counterfactual method.
The global explainability of the ELI5 method with respect
to RF and LGBM models is shown in Figure 2. These graphs
show the most effective attributes for classifying the crop
variety according to the weather and soil conditions in the
region. According to the information in the figure, it is seen
that the first two features that contribute the most to the
decision in crop classification for RF and LGBM models are
“Humidity” and “Rainfall”. The third attribute is “Potassium”
for RF and “Phosphorus” for LGBM. This information shows
that moisture and rainfall features are critical in determining
crop diversity.
For local interpretability, a single data instance is selected,
and the model’s decision output for this data is analyzed. In
this context, the local interpretability of the most successful
models, RF and LGBM, has been extracted for randomly
selected data instances. The local interpretability of RF and
LGBM models for randomly selected data are given in Figure
3 and Figure 4, respectively. In Figure 2, the RF model
predicted the selected single data instance as papaya with
a probability of 95.5%, grapes with 2.2%, and maize with
1.1%. The interpretability of this result was derived using the
ELI5 method. According to this, “Potassium”, ”Phosphorus”
and ”Humidity” were the most effective features for the
papaya decision. On the other hand, ”Rainfall”, ”Potassium”
Fig. 2: ELI5 global explanations for RF (Left) and LGBM
(Right)
and ”Temperature” were more effective for maize and grape
predictions. For the same test data, the LGBM model predicted
papaya with 100% accuracy. The interpretability of this result
was obtained using the ELI5 method and is shown in Figure
3. According to this, it was determined that the most effective
features in the decision of the LGBM model were Phosphorus,
pH and Humidity”, respectively. When both global and local
explanation results of the ELI5 method are evaluated together,
it is observed that the values of humidity, rainfall, phosphorus,
and potassium are decisive features in regional crop produc-
tion.
In this study, more than one method is used for better inter-
pretability of model decisions. In this context, RF and LGBM
model decisions are also explained both locally and globally
with the SHAP method. First, the global explainability of
the SHAP method for the RF and LGBM models is shown
using the summary plot in Figure 5. The features are ranked
according to their importance. Here, each color represents
the contribution to different crop types. For both the RF and
LGBM models, ”Humidity” is identified as the most important
feature for crop classification. While the other decisive features
for the RF model are phosphorus, potassium, and nitrogen,
they are ranked as rainfall, phosphorus, and potassium for the
LGBM model.
Then, SHAP local explainability results were obtained for
the sample test data provided in the description of Figure
6 and illustrated using a force plot. In the force plot, the
feature occupying the largest area is the one contributing
the most to the decision. Accordingly, ”Phosphorus” was the
most contributing feature for the RF model, while ”Nitrogen”
played the same role for the LGBM model. Features shown
in red have a positive contribution to the decision, whereas
those in blue have a negative contribution. For the RF model,
”Phosphorus” and ”pH” contributed positively, while ”Potas-
sium,” ”Nitrogen,” and ”Humidity” contributed negatively. In
the LGBM model, ”Phosphorus” and ”Rainfall” contributed
positively, whereas the most influential feature, ”nitrogen,” had
a negative contribution.
We also examined the local explanations of the RF and
LGBM model according to LIME, another local explainability
method. As shown in Figure 7, for the randomly selected data,
the RF model predicted lentil with 85% probability, mothbean
with 7% probability, jute with 5% probability and mungbean
with 3% probability. The contribution of the features for this
prediction is shown on the right side of the figure from max-
imum to minimum. Rainfall greater than 121.91, Potassium
greater than 32 and Nitrogen greater than 37 led to the con-
clusion of lentils. Rainfall greater than 121.91 and Humidity
content greater than 61.02 contributed to the decision for
mothbean. For jute, Rainfall greater than 121.91, Potassium
greater than 32, Nitrogen greater than 37 and Phosphorus
greater than 28 contributed positively, while Humidity greater
than 61.02, pH greater than 6.92 and Temperature greater than
22.76 negatively influenced the decision.
On the other hand, the LGBM model classified the same
sample data as lentil with 100% probability as shown in Figure
Fig. 3: ELI5 local explanations for RF (Randomly selected sample test data: Nitrogen = 44, Phosphorus = 60, Potassium =
55, Temperature = 34.28046, Humidity = 90.555618, pH = 6.825371, Rainfall = 98.540474)
Fig. 4: ELI5 local explanations for LGBM (Randomly selected sample test data: Nitrogen = 44, Phosphorus = 60, Potassium
= 55, Temperature = 34.28046, Humidity = 90.555618, pH = 6.825371, Rainfall = 98.540474)
Fig. 5: SHAP global explanations for RF (Left) and LGBM (Right)
Fig. 6: SHAP local explanations for RF (Top) and LGBM (Bottom)- Randomly selected sample data: Nitrogen = 39, Phosphorus
= 77, Potassium = 21, Temperature = 22.997744, Humidity = 60.242188, pH = 4.603563, Rainfall = 159.689346
Fig. 7: LIME local explanations for RF (Used sample data: Nitrogen = 70, Phosphorus = 38, Potassium = 35, Temperature =
24.397362, Humidity = 79.268616, pH = 7.014064, Rainfall = 164.269699 )
8. This decision is largely influenced by rainfall and potassium
features.
Up to this point, we have evaluated the post-hoc explain-
ability of the model results by using ELI5, SHAP and LIME.
In this study, we also aimed to provide alternative crop
recommendation based on edge computation regionally in
addition to the interpretability of the current decisions. In this
context, we used the counterfactual explainability method to
identify the list of other crops that can be planted for each
predicted crop. In counterfactual explainability, each selected
data sample is referred to as the “actual instance,” and the
class for selected data is predicted. In addition to this result,
alternative counterfactual suggestions are provided for the
output. In this way, regionally appropriate products and al-
ternative suggestions are obtained. Based on this information,
counterfactual explainability results for randomly selected data
samples are presented in Table IV and Table V.
As seen in Table 4, the RF model has predicted the selected
actual instance data as Papaya. However, with some changes in
the input data features, it is observed that counterfactually, the
instance could also be classified as Banana, Mango, or Rice.
However, it is noted that for these alternative crops, changes
in values such as rainfall, nitrogen, and humidity are required.
These value changes and their directions are illustrated in
Figure 9a. In Figure 9, the bar graphs up and down from 0
show the changes in the feature values for the counterfactual
classes. For instance, a farmer who wants to grow Rice in a
region instead of Papaya as given in counterfactual-3 would
need to increase the Nitrogen and Rainfall values and decrease
the Humidity values in that region. However, it may not be
inherently possible to change some characteristics. For this
reason, it would be appropriate to turn to crops with features
that can be changed.
In Table V, the actual instance and counterfactual outputs of
the LGBM model for the same test data are provided. Figure
9b illustrates the changes for each counterfactual output com-
pared to the actual instance in the LGBM model. According
to this result, a farmer who wants to grow Rice given in
counterfactual-3 instead of Papaya should expect an increase
in Rainfall and a decrease in Humidity in the region.
When all the explainability method results are evaluated,
post-hoc explainability of the ML models has been achieved
through methods such as ELI5, SHAP, and LIME. Accord-
ingly, although each algorithm highlights different features
Fig. 8: LIME local explanations for LGBM (Used sample data: Nitrogen = 70, Phosphorus = 38, Potassium = 35, Temperature
= 24.397362, Humidity = 79.268616, pH = 7.014064, Rainfall = 164.269699 )
TABLE IV: Counterfactuals for RF
Type of Instance
Nitrogen
Phosphorus
Potassium
Temperature
Humidity
pH
Rainfall
Label
Actual Instance
44
60
55
34.28046
90.555618
6.825371
98.540474
Papaya
Counterfactual-1
117
60
55
34.281461
45.50041
6.825371
98.550477
Banana
Counterfactual-2
44
60
38
34.281461
60.18227
6.825371
98.550477
Mango
Counterfactual-3
85
60
55
34.281461
85.29596
6.825371
295.154486
Rice
TABLE V: Counterfactual Explainability for LGBM
Type of Instance
Nitrogen
Phosphorus
Potassium
Temperature
Humidity
pH
Rainfall
Label
Actual Instance
44
60
55
34.28046
90.555618
6.825371
98.540474
Papaya
Counterfactual-1
93
86
55
34.281461
90.655616
5.916632
98.550477
Banana
Counterfactual-2
137
60
55
34.281461
45.35615
6.825371
98.550477
Mango
Counterfactual-3
44
60
55
34.281461
29.08982
6.825371
259.863518
Rice
(a) Counterfactuals for RF
(b) Counterfactuals for LGBM
Fig. 9: Counterfactual Explainability of RF and LGBM models
in different orders globally and locally, similar features were
emphasized in the decision-making process. This phenomenon
corresponds to the disagreement problem in the field of XAI.
While the ML models produce the same predictions, they
may provide different explanations regarding the impact of
features on the outcome. The results obtained in this study
confirm this observation. On the other hand, we used coun-
terfactual explainability to provide product suggestions for
growing alternative crops and diversification. The results of
this methodology also yielded valuable results in terms of
providing alternative products regionally.
IV. DISCUSSION
The AgroXAI system ensures model explainability while
fostering crop diversity by offering locally relevant alternative
crop recommendations. These features allow for the trans-
parent disclosure of the rationale behind agricultural system
decisions, thereby enhancing the decision-making process of
farmers. While the AgroXAI system offers numerous advan-
tages, it is essential to also address critical aspects such as
security, privacy, ethical considerations, economic feasibility,
and local preferences. Therefore, this section will explore these
key issues in detail.
In explainable systems, there is generally a trade-off be-
tween accuracy and interpretability. Accordingly, models with
high interpretability tend to have lower accuracy, while models
with higher accuracy may exhibit reduced interpretability. In
the context of AgroXAI, this highlights the need to strike a
balance between optimizing the accuracy and ensuring trans-
parency for users. Therefore, the selection of XAI methods in
systems like AgroXAI may depend on a choice between max-
imizing model accuracy and presenting the system’s decisions
in an understandable and user-friendly manner.
While the AgroXAI system facilitates transparency and
informed decision-making, its reliance on user data and sensor-
derived information introduces potential concerns. If sensor
security is not adequately ensured, malicious actors could
create privacy and security risks. As such, addressing security
and privacy is paramount in the design and implementation of
the system to ensure its trustworthiness.
In another dimension, AgroXAI aims to minimize en-
vironmental impacts by helping farmers optimize resource
usage. By employing the counterfactual method, it provides
valuable information on how farmers should adjust water and
fertilizer levels for different crops, thus enhancing productivity.
For instance, this feature supports sustainable agriculture by
promoting the efficient use of water resources and preserving
soil health through optimized fertilizer use. However, the
potential impacts of crop recommendations on livelihoods
and food security must also be carefully considered. For
instance, if the recommended crops are not suitable for local
climate conditions or soil characteristics, crop failure may
occur, leading to a significant decline in farmers’ income.
Such losses present considerable risks, particularly in regions
where agriculture and food security are critical. In light of
these challenges, the ability of developed systems to adapt
to changing environmental conditions and provide appropriate
recommendations becomes increasingly important, especially
in a context where climate variability and soil degradation are
escalating.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we propose a digitalized, remotely manage-
able, data-driven, and AI-supported system aimed at achieving
the sustainability, efficiency, capacity enhancement, and smart
agricultural production goals targeted by Agriculture 4.0. We
present an explainable AI-powered smart crop selection and
recommendation system to meet these needs. The proposed
system is structured to identify crops suitable for specific
geographical conditions and to provide a list of alternative
crops. By focusing on the promising area of XAI within
the field of AI, AgroXAI has the potential to build trust
on the user side. The obtained results have increased the
interpretability of the model decisions of the developed system
through different XAI methods and established confidence
among users. Additionally, the results provide insights into
the environmental factors that need to change for regional
crop alternatives. In this respect, AgroXAI is expected to
contribute to customized production processes by serving as
both an intelligent and explainable decision support system
in agricultural production. In the coming years, with the
widespread adoption of such systems, farmers will be able
to better understand region-specific conditions, increase effi-
ciency, minimize environmental impacts, and optimize product
diversity.
REFERENCES
[1] O. Friha, M. A. Ferrag, L. Shu, L. Maglaras, and X. Wang, “Internet of
things for the future of smart agriculture: A comprehensive survey of
emerging technologies,” IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, vol. 8,
no. 4, pp. 718–752, 2021.
[2] R. C¸ akmakc¸ı, M. A. Salık, and S. C¸ akmakc¸ı, “Assessment and principles
of environmentally sustainable food and agriculture systems,” Agricul-
ture, vol. 13, no. 5, p. 1073, 2023.
[3] M. M. Rahman, A. Islam, and S. Ferdousee, “Crop diversification,
sustainable production, and consumption (sdg-12) in rural bangladesh:
insights from the northern region of the country,” Circular Agricultural
Systems, vol. 4, no. 1, 2024.
[4] A. Barman, P. Saha, S. Patel, and A. Bera, “Crop diversification an ef-
fective strategy for sustainable agriculture development,” in Sustainable
crop production-recent advances.
IntechOpen, 2022.
[5] H. T. Bui, H. Aboutorab, A. Mahboubi, Y. Gao, N. H. Sultan,
A. Chauhan, M. Z. Parvez, M. Bewong, R. Islam, Z. Islam et al.,
“Agriculture 4.0 and beyond: Evaluating cyber threat intelligence sources
and techniques in smart farming ecosystems,” Computers & Security, p.
103754, 2024.
[6] M. F. B. Alam, S. R. Tushar, S. M. Zaman, E. D. S. Gonzalez,
A. M. Bari, and C. L. Karmaker, “Analysis of the drivers of agriculture
4.0 implementation in the emerging economies: Implications towards
sustainability and food security,” Green Technologies and Sustainability,
vol. 1, no. 2, p. 100021, 2023.
[7] A. A. AlZubi and K. Galyna, “Artificial intelligence and internet of
things for sustainable farming and smart agriculture,” IEEE Access,
2023.
[8] ˙I. K¨ok, B. H. C¸ orak, U. Yavano˘glu, and S. ¨Ozdemir, “Deep learning
based delay and bandwidth efficient data transmission in IoT,” in 2019
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data).
IEEE, 2019,
pp. 2327–2333.
[9] B. B. Sinha and R. Dhanalakshmi, “Recent advancements and challenges
of internet of things in smart agriculture: A survey,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 126, pp. 169–184, 2022.
[10] M. C¸ etin and S. Beyhan, “Smart irrigation systems using machine learn-
ing and control theory,” The Digital Agricultural Revolution: Innovations
and Challenges in Agriculture through Technology Disruptions, pp. 57–
85, 2022.
[11] I. K¨ok, F. Y. Okay, ¨O. Muyanlı, and S. ¨Ozdemir, “Explainable artificial
intelligence (xai) for internet of things: a survey,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 10, no. 16, pp. 14 764–14 779, 2023.
[12] A. Sharma, M. Bhargava, and A. V. Khanna, “Ai-farm: A crop recom-
mendation system,” in 2021 International Conference on Advances in
Computing and Communications (ICACC), 2021, pp. 1–7.
[13] Z. Doshi, S. Nadkarni, R. Agrawal, and N. Shah, “Agroconsultant: Intel-
ligent crop recommendation system using machine learning algorithms,”
in 2018 Fourth International Conference on Computing Communication
Control and Automation (ICCUBEA), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[14] R. K. Rajak, A. Pawar, M. Pendke, P. Shinde, S. Rathod, and A. Devare,
“Crop recommendation system to maximize crop yield using machine
learning technique,” International Research Journal of Engineering and
Technology, vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 950–953, 2017.
[15] S. Pudumalar, E. Ramanujam, R. H. Rajashree, C. Kavya, T. Kiruthika,
and J. Nisha, “Crop recommendation system for precision agriculture,”
in 2016 Eighth International Conference on Advanced Computing
(ICoAC).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 32–36.
[16] S. K, K. R, and N. S, “TILLAGE : An ensemble-based agricultural crop
recommendation system,” International Journal of Scientific Research in
Science, Engineering and Technology, pp. 280–285, 2023.
[17] F. Bu and X. Wang, “A smart agriculture iot system based on deep
reinforcement learning,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 99,
pp. 500–507, 2019.
[18] R. S. Alonso, I. Sitt´on-Candanedo, R. Casado-Vara, J. Prieto, and
J. M. Corchado, “Deep reinforcement learning for the management
of software-defined networks in smart farming,” in 2020 International
Conference on Omni-layer Intelligent Systems (COINS).
IEEE, 2020,
pp. 1–6.
[19] A. Din, M. Y. Ismail, B. Shah, M. Babar, F. Ali, and S. U. Baig, “A
deep reinforcement learning-based multi-agent area coverage control for
smart agriculture,” Computers and Electrical Engineering, vol. 101, p.
108089, 2022.
[20] F. Sabrina, S. Sohail, F. Farid, S. Jahan, F. Ahamed, and S. Gordon,
“An interpretable artificial intelligence based smart agriculture system,”
Computers, Materials & Continua, pp. 3777–3797, 2022.
[21] A. Cartolano, A. Cuzzocrea, G. Pilato, and G. M. Grasso, “Explainable
ai at work! what can it do for smart agriculture?” in 2022 IEEE Eighth
International Conference on Multimedia Big Data (BigMM).
IEEE,
2022, pp. 87–93.
[22] M. K. Han, J. and J. Pei, Data Mining: concepts and techniques.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2012.
[23] M. Negnevitsky, Artificial Intelligence: A Guide to Intelligent Systems,
3rd ed.
Pearson Education Limited, 2011.
[24] G. Ke, Q. Meng, T. Finley, T. Wang, W. Chen, W. Ma, Q. Ye, and T.-
Y. Liu, “Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[25] H. Shi, “Best-first decision tree learning,” Ph.D. dissertation, The
University of Waikato, 2007.
[26] E. G¨urb¨uz, ¨O. Turgut, and ˙I. K¨ok, “Explainable ai-based malicious traffic
detection and monitoring system in next-gen iot healthcare,” in 2023
International Conference on Smart Applications, Communications and
Networking (SmartNets).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–6.
[27] A. Bhattacharya, Applied Machine Learning Explainability Techniques,
1st ed., 2022.
[28] C. Molnar, Interpretable Machine Learning, 2nd ed., 2022. [Online].
Available: https://christophm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book
[29] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “” why should i trust you?”
explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and
data mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[30] “Smart agricultural
production
optimizing
engine.”
[On-
line].
Available:
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/chitrakumari25/
smart-agricultural-production-optimizing-engine
