NeuralCrop: Combining physics and machine
learning for improved crop yield projections
Yunan Lin1,2*, Sebastian Bathiany1,2, Maha Badri1,2,
Maximilian Gelbrecht1,2, Philipp Hess1,2, Brian Groenke2,
Jens Heinke2, Christoph M¨uller2, Niklas Boers1,2,3*
1Munich Climate Center and Earth System Modelling Group,
Department of Aerospace and Geodesy, School of Engineering and
Design, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
2Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, Potsdam, Germany.
3University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): yunan.lin@tum.de;
n.boers@tum.de;
Abstract
Global gridded crop models (GGCMs) are crucial to project the impacts of cli-
mate change on agricultural productivity and assess associated risks for food
security. Despite decades of development, state-of-the-art GGCMs retain sub-
stantial uncertainties stemming from process representations. Recently, machine
learning approaches trained on observational data provide alternatives in crop
yield projections. However, these models have not demonstrated improved per-
formance over traditional GGCMs and are not suitable for projecting crop yields
under a changing climate due to their poor out-of-distribution generalization.
Here we introduce NeuralCrop, a differentiable hybrid GGCM that combines the
strengths of an advanced process-based GGCM, resolving important processes
explicitly, with data-driven machine learning components. NeuralCrop is first
trained to emulate a competitive GGCM before it is fine-tuned on observational
data. We show that NeuralCrop produces projections with accuracy compara-
ble to state-of-the-art GGCMs across site-level and large-scale crop simulations.
NeuralCrop can accurately project the interannual yield variability in European
wheat regions and the US Corn Belt. Capturing yield anomalies is essential for
developing adaptation strategies in the context of climate change. NeuralCrop
can more accurately reproduce yield anomalies across various climatic conditions,
with particularly notable improvements under drought extremes. For large-scale,
1
arXiv:2512.20177v2  [cs.LG]  30 Mar 2026
long-term simulations, our approach is orders of magnitude more computation-
ally efficient. Our results show that end-to-end hybrid crop modelling offers more
reliable yield projections that are essential for food risk assessments under climate
change and intensifying extreme weather events.
Introduction
Global food systems face intensifying threats from climate change, particularly
extreme weather events [1–3]. Accurately assessing the impacts of changing weather
and especially extreme event patterns on agricultural productivity is crucial for the
development of adaptation strategies to mitigate adverse effects and sustain future
food security [4, 5]. Global gridded crop models (GGCMs) are essential tools for pro-
jecting the impacts of climate change [6, 7], and are extensively used in downstream
analyses (e.g., food security [8, 9], sustainability [10], or economy [11]). Despite decades
of development, state-of-the-art GGCMs retain substantial uncertainties in process
representations and generally underestimate crop yield losses during extreme weather
events [12–16]. Given the projected increases in frequency and magnitude of extreme
events in a warming climate [17], and their strong influence on future food security,
these limitations present major challenges for the reliability of crop yield projections
and food risk assessments [18].
Machine learning (ML) approaches have emerged rapidly in agricultural ecosys-
tem modelling [19–21]. These models are capable of learning complex, nonlinear
interactions, which are difficult to explicitly resolve in process-based GGCMs, from
observational data (e.g., remote sensing, field measurements, and subnational statis-
tics), providing an alternative for crop yield projections. ML approaches have been
successfully used to emulate GGCMs to enable sensitivity and uncertainty analyses
under input perturbations [22], and to downscale GGCM outputs to finer spatial and
temporal resolutions [23]. Once trained, ML approaches typically require considerably
lower computational costs and memory demands during inference than traditional
GGCMs.
However, ML approaches have noteworthy limitations compared with GGCMs.
Most ML models are optimized using root-mean-squared-error loss, which rewards
averaging over uncertainty and consequently produces overly smoothed projections
for long-term crop simulations [24]. Lacking realistic biophysical mechanisms, these
purely data-driven models only capture statistical correlations, leading to limited
interpretability and poor extrapolation to unseen future climates [19, 25]. Ensuring
generalization and physical consistency thus remains a primary barrier to the appli-
cation of pure ML models in crop modelling. In addition, sparse observational data
further limits the use of pure ML models [26]. Despite some success in using ML
approaches on crop simulations, these models have not demonstrated to outperform
state-of-the-art GGCMs [22, 23].
In light of the complementary benefits and limitations of process-based and ML-
based models, hybrid models have been proposed as a promising direction for model
2
development [27, 28]. By replacing or augmenting poorly represented physical pro-
cesses with data-driven ML components [29, 30], hybrid models have achieved notable
success across diverse fields, outperforming pure ML models and traditional process-
based models [31–33]. Several studies have recently explored the combination of ML
models with GGCMs [34–37], but ML in these models is typically used in a post-
processing step to adjust outputs from GGCMs, or used to emulate these models,
rather than being integrated into their internal processes. To enable efficient gradient-
based optimization of all parameters jointly and consistently, the hybrid model should
support automatic differentiation [29]. However, existing traditional GGCMs are not
differentiable. A key technical challenge for traditional GGCMs in this context is that
they are typically written in Fortran or C, which struggle to support automatic dif-
ferentiation and hinder ML integration into GGCMs. This can be solved by using a
language that is suitable for both process-based components and ML model training,
like Python or Julia.
Here we introduce NeuralCrop, a differentiable hybrid GGCM that combines the
strengths of the state-of-the-art GGCM LPJmL [38] with ML approaches. By imple-
menting components in a differentiable form to achieve seamless integration with
ML methods, NeuralCrop enables end-to-end ’online training’, with ML components
optimized in tandem with the model dynamics. Due to sparse observational data, Neu-
ralCrop is first pre-trained on GGCM outputs and further fine-tuned using a global
network of site-level observations. Extensive benchmarking shows that NeuralCrop
significantly outperforms LPJmL in simulating daily carbon and water fluxes across
diverse crop sites, and produces yield projections with accuracy comparable to best-
in-class GGCMs across a range of moisture gradients, with strong improvements under
extreme climatic conditions.
NeuralCrop
NeuralCrop is based on the LPJmL (”Lund-Potsdam-Jena managed Land”) model,
which explicitly simulates carbon, water, energy, and nitrogen flows for both natural
vegetation and agricultural crops at 0.5° × 0.5° (latitude × longitude) spatial and daily
temporal resolution [38–41]. LPJmL is a state-of-the-art process-based GGCM and
contributes to the global model intercomparison networks AgMIP and ISIMIP [42, 43].
It has been comprehensively evaluated at the global scale [44–47]. In NeuralCrop, neu-
ral networks are embedded to replace or augment key biological processes of LPJmL
that are uncertain or simplified but directly observable, such as photosynthesis and
soil moisture dynamics, or to emulate processes that are heuristic, such as carbon
allocation. The considered process-based components within NeuralCrop are fully dif-
ferentiable to enable a seamless integration with neural networks. These are described
in detail in the Supplementary Information B.
Given limited high-quality agricultural observations, we adopt a two-stage strategy
to train NeuralCrop, as illustrated in Fig. 1. In the absence of sufficient observational
data, pre-training NeuralCrop on extensive LPJmL simulations allows the ML compo-
nents to learn physically consistent representations, especially for latent variables. This
can accelerate and stabilize convergence during subsequent fine-tuning with observa-
tional data. End-to-end ’online training’ allows NeuralCrop to account for interactions
3
𝑥!
"
Forcings
Inputs
𝑦!#$
%
NeuralCrop
Outputs
GGCM outputs
𝑦!
""#$
min 𝐿(𝑦!
%, 𝑦!
""#$) 
𝑦!
"
Pre-training
a  Pre-training stage
𝑥!
"
Forcings
𝑥$
"
Inputs
𝑦!#$
%
𝑦&
%
Pre-trained
NeuralCrop
𝑦$
"
Observations
𝑦!
&'(
min 𝐿(𝑦!
%, 𝑦!
&'() 
Fine-tuning
Process-based
Hybrid
Outputs
𝑦!
"
b  Fine-tuning stage
Fig. 1 Schematic of the NeuralCrop two-stage training framework. It shows how forcings x n
t , includ-
ing weather, soil properties, land use, and field management (e.g., crop calendar, tillage, residue, and
fertilizer), and previous time-step model states y m
t−1 are fed into NeuralCrop at each time step t, where
n denotes the number of forcing variables and m denotes the number of model states. These model
states y m
t−1 are fed into the corresponding neural networks of hybrid components, which advance the
evolution of model states over time. The new model states y m
t
are then fed back into the model
to compute the next time step. a, In the pre-training stage, NeuralCrop is trained to emulate the
behavior of the process-based GGCM LPJmL by minimizing the discrepancies L(yn
t , yn
t ) between
NeuralCrop output yn
t and LPJmL output yn
t , given identical weather, soil property, land use, and
field management inputs. b, In the fine-tuning stage, the pre-trained NeuralCrop is further trained
using observational data from eddy-covariance observation networks, which serves as ground truth.
between ML and process-based components in a natural way, ensuring physical con-
sistency in the learned representations [29]. Furthermore, NeuralCrop supports full
graphics-processing-unit (GPU) acceleration, which makes global grid-based simula-
tions, and especially large ensembles thereof, computationally much more efficient, in
particular above a certain resolution or ensemble size.
We train NeuralCrop models at both the site and regional levels for different crops.
The training setup details can be found in the Supplementary Information section D.
For site-level representations, we evaluate the ability of NeuralCrop to reproduce daily
gross primary productivity (GPP), ecosystem respiration (RECO), net ecosystem
exchange (NEE), and soil water content (SWC) against flux tower observations (see
Supplementary Information section F). For large-scale cropping regions, we evaluate
NeuralCrop’s performance in simulating wheat and maize yields under both normal
and extreme climate conditions against reported yield statistics from two major global
breadbaskets, i.e., European wheat regions and the US Corn Belt (see Supplementary
Information section G).
4
Results
Long-term yield projections
Our evaluation setup focuses on the ability of NeuralCrop to capture the long-term
interannual yield variability, which is a key requirement for GGCMs. We compare
simulated wheat yields from NeuralCrop and state-of-the-art GGCMs with the har-
monized EU subnational crop statistics dataset (hereafter, EU statistics) [48] and corn
yields with USDA statistics at the county level over the period 2000-2016. The simu-
lated yields are aggregated from a spatial resolution of 0.5° to the subnational units of
yield statistics, using an area-weighted averaging method (see Methods and Supple-
mentary Information H.1). Prior to comparison, we detrend all yield time series using
a cubic smoothing spline to remove the effects of long-term crop breeding advances
and management improvements, focusing on climate-driven yield variability (Methods
and Supplementary Information H.2).
European wheat
The temporal correlations between simulated and statistical yields for each region
over 2000-2016 are shown in Figures 2a-c. LPJmL exhibits strong spatial heterogene-
ity, with high correlations in Eastern Europe, but weak or even negative values in
parts of Western, Central, and Northern Europe (such as many regions of France and
Germany). Notably, the ensemble median of AgMIP captures a similar but generally
weaker spatial correlation pattern to LPJmL, indicating a common challenge for cur-
rent GGCMs in the latter regions. In contrast, NeuralCrop presents a more spatially
consistent pattern of positive correlations. Figures 2d-e illustrate the spatial distribu-
tion of the correlation difference between NeuralCrop and GGCMs(also see Extended
Data Fig. 6). Among 800 subnational regions, NeuralCrop achieves higher correlation
in 528 regions than LPJmL, accounting for 66%, with 258 regions (32.25%) showing
notable improvements where the correlation increases more than 0.2. When compared
against the ensemble median of AgMIP, NeuralCrop also demonstrates strong perfor-
mance in capturing interannual yield variability, achieving higher correlations in 601
regions with 414 regions showing notable improvements (correlation increase exceed-
ing 0.2). At the country level, NeuralCrop outperforms LPJmL (AgMIP) in 16 (19) of
the 26 countries (see Extended Data Fig. 6). NeuralCrop shows pronounced improve-
ment in Western and Central Europe, particularly in France and Germany. These
regions are consistent with the spatial distribution of eddy-covariance flux observa-
tions (see Supplementary Information Fig. S10), suggesting the potential to further
improve NeuralCrop’s performance to capture interannual yield variability with more
comprehensive observational data.
US Corn Belt
For the US Corn Belt, we focus on a region including nine states (Supplementary
Information Fig. S11), which accounts for about two-thirds of total US corn produc-
tion [49]. Figures 3a-c show temporal correlations between simulated corn yields and
statistical corn yields for each county over the period 2000-2016. LPJmL exhibits
5
a
b
c
d
e
Fig. 2 Comparison of simulated European wheat yields from NeuralCrop, LPJmL, and the AgMIP
ensemble median with EU statistics [48] in European wheat regions. The AgMIP ensemble includes
8 GGCMs. a, Time series correlation coefficient between NeuralCrop simulated wheat yield and EU
statistics at the subnational level for the period 2000-2016 (range from −1 to 1, darker green areas
indicate stronger positive correlations, and darker purple areas indicate stronger negative correla-
tions). b, Same as panel a, but for LPJmL. c, Same as panel a, but for AgMIP. d, The difference of
correlation coefficients between NeuralCrop and LPJmL (i.e., panel a – panel b), where blue areas
indicate regions where NeuralCrop outperforms LPJmL in simulating interannual yield variability,
and red areas indicate regions where LPJmL performs better. NeuralCrop outperforms (underper-
forms) LPJmL in 66% (34%) of the 800 subnational regions. e, Same as panel d but for the difference
between NeuralCrop and AgMIP (i.e., panel a – panel c). NeuralCrop outperforms (underperforms)
AgMIP in 75.25% (24.75%) of the 800 subnational regions.
strong correlations in the southern US Corn Belt, but weak or even negative val-
ues in the north (such as parts of Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan). NeuralCrop
is generally more robust than LPJmL and corrects the negative correlations in the
northern regions. The AgMIP ensemble demonstrates strong and spatially consistent
correlations across the US Corn Belt. Figures 3d-e illustrate the spatial distribution of
the correlation difference between NeuralCrop and GGCMs (also see Extended Data
Fig. 7). Among 677 counties, NeuralCrop yields higher correlation in 484 counties,
accounting for 71.49%, with 185 counties (27.32%) showing remarkable improvements
6
a
b
c
d
e
Fig. 3 Comparison of simulated corn yields from NeuralCrop, LPJmL, and the AgMIP ensem-
ble median with USDA statistics in the US Corn Belt, including nine states (i.e., South Dakota,
Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Wisconsin, Illinois, Michigan, Indiana, and Ohio). The AgMIP ensemble
includes 8 GGCMs. a, Time series correlation coefficient between NeuralCrop simulated corn yield
and USDA statistics at the county level for the period 2000-2016 (range from −1 to 1, darker green
areas indicate stronger positive correlations, and darker purple areas indicate stronger negative cor-
relations). b, Same as panel a, but for LPJmL. c, Same as panel a, but for AgMIP. d, The difference
of correlation coefficients between NeuralCrop and LPJmL (i.e., panel a – panel b), where blue areas
indicate regions where NeuralCrop outperforms LPJmL in simulating interannual yield variability,
and red areas indicate regions where LPJmL performs better. NeuralCrop outperforms (underper-
forms) LPJmL in 71.49% (28.51%) of the 677 counties. e, Same as panel d but for the difference
between NeuralCrop and AgMIP (i.e., panel a – panel c). NeuralCrop outperforms (underperforms)
AgMIP in 53% (47%) of the 677 counties.
where correlation increases more than 0.2. When compared against the ensemble
median of AgMIP, NeuralCrop achieves higher correlations in 422 regions with 150
regions showing notable improvements (correlation increase exceeding 0.2). At the
country level, NeuralCrop outperforms LPJmL (AgMIP) in 7 (5) of the 9 states (see
Extended Data Fig. 7). NeuralCrop underperforms the AgMIP ensemble in the north-
ern regions. It is noted that no single GGCM consistently outperforms the others, as
individual model performance varies significantly across crop types and geographical
regions. Multi-model ensembles are the primary strategy for mitigating uncertain-
ties in crop simulations [16]. NeuralCrop demonstrates that hybrid crop modelling
has great potential to enhance its base model performance. We expect that apply-
ing this approach to state-of-the-art GGCMs will significantly improve the projecting
performance of multi-model ensembles.
7
Performance across moisture gradients
We evaluate the ability of NeuralCrop to reproduce yield anomalies (Supplementary
Information H.3) across the European wheat regions and the US Corn Belt over
the period 2000–2016, under various moisture gradients as defined by the respec-
tive growing-season Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI). The
SPEI is a drought index used to characterize drought intensity, duration, and fre-
quency across different timescales [50] (Supplementary Information G.4). We use
April–June SPEI for wheat and May-July SPEI for corn [51–53]. We further select
two specific drought years as case studies, i.e., the 2018 European drought and the
2012 US drought, to evaluate the performance of NeuralCrop under extreme drought
events. All analyses are based on detrended yield data (Methods and Supplementary
Information H.2).
Yield anomalies across years
It is evident that NeuralCrop outperforms LPJmL and the AgMIP ensemble in captur-
ing yield anomalies for both wheat and corn across various moisture gradients (Fig. 4).
Under dry conditions, the yield statistics (benchmark) reveal that both wheat and
corn yields decline significantly as drought intensifies (Fig. 4a). While LPJmL and
AgMIP capture the general trend of increasing yield losses, they show a tendency to
underestimate drought-induced yield losses, consistent with previous findings [16, 54].
NeuralCrop generally achieves the lowest root mean square error (RMSE) and matches
the benchmark medians and means more closely across all dryness classes. Under
wet conditions, the benchmark shows that wheat yields experience amplified losses as
wetness intensifies, whereas LPJmL and AgMIP erroneously project a trend of yield
increases (Fig. 4b), indicating the limitations of state-of-the-art GGCMs in repre-
senting waterlogging stress. This likely stems from the fact that current GGCMs do
not explicitly simulate the impacts of water excess on crops, which limits their abil-
ity to reproduce yield anomalies across wetness gradients [55]. NeuralCrop effectively
mitigates these spurious yield gains, achieving the lowest RMSE and matching the
benchmark medians and means more closely across all wetness classes. These results
suggest that NeuralCrop provides a more consistent and accurate representation of
yield responses across moisture gradients, particularly under extreme conditions where
existing GGCMs show systematic limitations.
Case study
As extreme weather events are expected to increase in frequency and magnitude due
to climate change [17], an important ability of GGCMs is to project yield anomalies
under extreme events. Fig. 5 shows a case study that illustrates the performance of
NeuralCrop during the 2018 European drought and the 2012 US drought. It is noted
that the AgMIP wheat ensemble is excluded from this analysis as it only provides
historical yield simulations up to 2016, and the AgMIP corn ensemble is presented
in Extended Data Fig. 8. Fig. 5a shows that the majority of Europe experienced
significant drought-induced wheat yield losses in 2018, especially regions in Central and
Northern Europe. Similarly, most of the US Corn Belt suffered from severe corn yield
8
Fig. 4 Comparison of simulated yield anomalies from NeuralCrop, LPJmL, and the AgMIP ensem-
ble median with yield statistics (benchmark) for European wheat and US Corn Belt across moisture
gradients at the subnational level during 2000–2016. The AgMIP ensemble includes 8 GGCMs. a,
The boxplots represent the reported and simulated wheat yield anomalies in the EU over the period
2000–2019, grouped by the April-June Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI,
see Supplementary Information G.4). Green boxes denote EU statistics, orange boxes denote Neu-
ralCrop, blue boxes denote LPJmL, and purple boxes denote AgMIP. The box boundaries represent
the interquartile range (IQR), defined by the first quartile, the median, and the third quartile. The
upper and lower whiskers represent the maximum and minimum values that are within 1.5 times the
interquartile range of the box. The black triangles are the mean values. The bars in the lower panel
represent the root mean square error (RMSE) for NeuralCrop, LPJmL, and AgMIP within each SPEI
class. Orange bars denote NeuralCrop, blue bars denote LPJmL, and purple bars denote AgMIP. b,
Same as panel a, but for corn yields evaluated against USDA statistics.
9
a
b
c
d
e
f
Fig. 5 Yield anomalies and model performance for NeuralCrop and LPJmL under the extreme
drought years. a, Wheat yield anomalies in 2018 at the subnational level from EU statistics. b, Scatter
plot comparing simulated wheat yield anomalies (%) by LPJmL against EU statistics (benchmark).
The color gradient indicates the density of data points, and the dashed line represents the 1:1 line.
R2 and RMSE values are shown in the upper left. c, Same as panel b, but for NeuralCrop. d, Corn
yield anomalies in 2012 at the county level from USDA statistics. e, Scatter plot comparing simulated
corn yield anomalies (%) by LPJmL against USDA statistics (benchmark). f, Same as panel e, but
for NeuralCrop.
deficits in 2012 (Fig. 5d). LPJmL generally underestimates the extent of yield losses
for both the 2018 wheat and 2012 corn drought events, but NeuralCrop outperforms
the process-based LPJmL in capturing these negative yield anomalies with higher R2
and lower RMSE, despite slightly overestimating these deficits. When compared to
the AgMIP corn ensemble (Fig. 8), NeuralCrop also achieves higher R2 and lower
RMSE. As drought and heat typically occur together, we further investigate their
compound impacts on yield anomalies. We find that the maximum temperature during
the growing season intensified the impact of drought on yield anomalies for both wheat
and corn (see Supplementary Information Fig. S16 and Fig. S17). NeuralCrop also
demonstrates a stronger performance in capturing these compounding impacts.
10
Discussion
NeuralCrop can more accurately reproduce the daily and seasonal dynamics of car-
bon and water fluxes across diverse crop in-situ observation sites (Supplementary
Information F). The interannual instability of crop yields is a critical determinant of
food security under climate change [56], which is a key indicator for evaluating the
performance of GGCMs. Traditional GGCMs suffer from pronounced spatial hetero-
geneity in yield-projection accuracy, which poses a major challenge for global food risk
assessments. NeuralCrop exhibits more accurate projections of the interannual yield
variability at European wheat regions and the US Corn Belt after fine-tuning with site-
level observations. We believe NeuralCrop has the potential to improve simulations
when more observations are available. Traditional GGCMs can typically detect but
underestimate the drought-induced yield losses across various drought conditions [57],
and fail to capture the yield losses driven by wet extremes. Our results show that
NeuralCrop outperforms GGCMs in capturing yield anomalies across various moisture
gradients with higher fidelity for both wheat and maize. Overall, NeuralCrop shows
that incorporating ML is a promising approach for reducing uncertainty in process
representations and parameterizations within GGCMs.
NeuralCrop is, to our knowledge, the first hybrid, end-to-end ’online’ trainable
GGCM that combines the strengths of state-of-the-art GGCMs with ML approaches.
Compared with ’offline’ training, where the ML component is trained independently of
the evolving model states, end-to-end ’online’ training enables ML components within
NeuralCrop to continuously learn from and adjust the evolving model states. This
co-evolution ensures that NeuralCrop maintains numerical stability over long-term
simulations, preventing error accumulation [32], and also improves physical consis-
tency. Compared with traditional GGCMs, NeuralCrop is computationally orders of
magnitude more efficient. For example, running NeuralCrop on a single GPU and
LPJmL on 128 central-processing-unit (CPU) cores at 0.5◦spatial resolution with daily
time steps over 20 years, respectively, NeuralCrop achieved up to an 82.3× speedup
as the number of grid cells increased to 14,157 (see Extended Data Fig. 9 and Sup-
plementary Information Table. S4). This can be used for previously impractical tasks
such as large ensemble simulations.
Pure ML approaches for crop modelling typically struggle to generalize to unseen
data [19]. Due to its hybrid approach, NeuralCrop demonstrates robust out-of-
sample generalization capabilities (see Supplementary Information section G.3). We
expect that it can be used to accurately simulate data-sparse, climate-vulnerable,
and under-studied cropping regions, for example in Africa, South America, and Asia.
Furthermore, as individual GGCM performance varies significantly across crops and
regions, multi-model ensembles remain essential for mitigating simulation uncertain-
ties [16]. NeuralCrop demonstrates that hybrid crop modelling has great potential to
enhance its base model performance. When applying this approach to state-of-the-art
GGCMs, substantial headroom exists to further improve the projecting performance
of multi-model ensembles.
Due to limited understanding, many biophysical processes are oversimplified or
omitted in GGCMs [58]. For instance, the representation of soil waterlogging remains
in its infancy in advanced GGCMs, and many GGCMs including LPJmL do not
11
account for soil waterlogging mechanisms [55], consistent with our results that yield
responses under wet extremes are poorly captured by GGCMs. Similarly, processes
like the impacts of compound climate events and pest/disease stress are only par-
tially simulated or not included in traditional GGCMs [12]. These gaps limit the
ability of GGCMs to simulate the individual and combined effects of these stresses.
As an example, LPJmL failed to detect the yield losses driven by heavy rainfall in
combination with soil anoxia and diseases in central and northern France in 2016,
and instead projected a yield increase (Supplementary Information Fig. S18) [51, 59].
While pre-trained NeuralCrop inherits the same process limitations, it captures part
of the negative but smaller yield anomalies in northern France after fine-tuning (Sup-
plementary Information Figs. S18c-f). This suggests that, despite without an explicit
representation of these processes, the ML components can still learn from observational
data to partially capture their indirect impacts.
NeuralCrop is flexible to incorporate new process knowledge as our understanding
of crop biophysical processes advances or with more ML components as higher-quality
observational data becomes available. It also provides a powerful means to diag-
nose what processes are not well represented in the original GGCMs. Until now,
the high-quality observational data suitable for the NeuralCrop training comes from
eddy-covariance observation networks. In regions where more data is available, results
showed that NeuralCrop strongly outperforms traditional GGCMs. We hence expect
that end-to-end ’online training’, with observational data covering broader areas and
longer time periods, will enable more realistic crop simulations. Given ongoing cli-
mate change, more advanced and climate-robust GGCMs are needed to quantify the
impacts of climate change and especially intensifying extreme weather events on agri-
cultural productivity. We believe the hybrid modelling approach of NeuralCrop offers
a promising avenue to support food risk assessments.
Methods
Pre-training data generation
We use LPJmL to generate data to pre-train NeuralCrop. The process-based LPJmL
model simulates global carbon, water, and nitrogen fluxes and stocks, and surface
energy balance for both natural vegetation and agricultural crops [38–41]. As a con-
tributing model to the global model intercomparison networks AgMIP and ISIMIP,
LPJmL has been comprehensively evaluated at the global scale [42, 43, 45, 47]. For
cropland, driven by climate forcing, soil properties, land use, and field management
(e.g., crop calendar, tillage, residue, and fertilizer), LPJmL simulates key biophysi-
cal processes such as photosynthesis, carbon allocation, evapotranspiration, and soil
moisture dynamics, as well as bioclimatic impacts on crop growth, development, yield
formation across different crop functional types [39].
We ran LPJmL (version 5) on a global grid at 0.5° × 0.5° (latitude × longitude)
spatial and daily temporal resolution [40]. An initial 5000-year spin-up simulation
under potential natural vegetation (i.e., without land use) was performed to bring soil
carbon, nitrogen, and water pools into dynamic equilibrium. Starting from these equi-
librium states, a second 390-year spin-up simulation was conducted to introduce the
12
impacts of historical land-use change on these pools. Both spin-up simulations used
the first 30-year climate data cycled repeatedly to force LPJmL. The resulting model
states ensure biophysically consistent initial conditions for subsequent transient sim-
ulations of crop growth. The detailed description can be found in the Supplementary
Information section C.
NeuralCrop architecture
NeuralCrop explicitly resolved key processes, following their representation in the
LPJmL model, and is rewritten to support automatic differentiation and GPU opti-
mization, using the Julia programming language. NeuralCrop embeds ML components,
here fully-connected neural networks, into the process-based crop model to replace or
augment components that are uncertain or simplified (Supplementary Information B.
Neural networks can theoretically be used to parameterize any biased or simplified
process-based components within GGCMs [27]. In practice, however, their applica-
bility is constrained by the availability of observational data for training. It is only
feasible to combine neural networks with process-based components whose prognos-
tic variables are observable. In agricultural ecosystems, high-quality observational
data remain scarce. While numerous remote sensing data is now available, their spa-
tiotemporal resolutions are heterogeneous, making it difficult to use these data to
train hybrid models [12]. Currently, global eddy-covariance observation networks (e.g.,
FLUXNET [60] and AmeriFlux [61]) provide continuous, high-quality daily observa-
tions of crop carbon and water fluxes. Training on these data allows neural networks
to improve the representation of carbon and soil water-related processes in GGCMs.
We described in detail in Supplementary Information B how key process-based compo-
nents, i.e., photosynthesis, carbon allocation, soil carbon and nitrogen decomposition,
and soil water dynamics, are combined with neural networks.
The considered process-based components of NeuralCrop are implemented in a
fully differentiable manner to enable the end-to-end ’online training’, which requires all
processes along the backpropagation path to be differentiable by automatic differentia-
tion (AD) [62]. Differentiability allows ML components to be optimized by taking into
account interactions with the governing equations for model dynamics. For example,
we use neural ordinary differential equations (NODE) [63] in NeuralCrop to emu-
late daily carbon allocation (described in Supplementary Information B.2). Through
’online training’, the NODE parameters are updated while accounting for interactions
with internal prognostic states. Another big advantage of differentiability is that unob-
servable latent variables parameterized by neural networks can be implicitly optimized
through backpropagation using target prognostic observations. For example, in Neural-
Crop, we use two fully-connected neural networks to parameterize two latent variables
in photosynthesis (i.e., λ, a key variable related to photosynthetic electron trans-
port capacity, and maximum photosynthetic carboxylation rate Vcmax), respectively
(described in Supplementary Information B.1). This approach enables NeuralCrop to
capture the spatiotemporal variability of both λ and Vcmax using target GPP data,
thereby reducing uncertainty in the representation of photosynthesis.
NeuralCrop is implemented in Julia [64], a high-performance and mature pro-
gramming language for numerical and scientific computing, and its differentiability is
13
supported by the automatic differentiation package Zygote.jl [65]. NeuralCrop is ini-
tialized using equilibrium states of soil carbon, nitrogen, and water pools generated
from LPJmL simulations. All climate inputs to neural networks are standardized to
a normal distribution with zero mean and unit variance, while prognostic variable
inputs are linearly scaled to the range [0, 1] using their physical limits. NeuralCrop
is optimized for GPUs, which is computationally efficient due to its neural-network
components and grid-based simulations.
Two-stage training approach
Due to the limited high-quality observational data, we adopt a two-stage training
approach to train NeuralCrop at 0.5° × 0.5° (latitude × longitude) spatial and daily
temporal resolution (Fig. 1). During the pre-training stage, we train NeuralCrop on
LPJmL outputs using a loss function composed of two terms (Supplementary Infor-
mation D.3, Eq. S24). The first loss term promotes predictive accuracy by minimizing
discrepancies between NeuralCrop projections and LPJmL outputs, while the second
loss term imposes physical constraints to obey carbon mass balance. We then fine-tune
the pre-trained model using real-world observations, specifically the carbon and water
flux data from eddy-covariance observation networks, using the accuracy loss function
(Supplementary Information D.3, Eq. S25). The processing of flux data is described
in detail in Supplementary Information C.4. The fine-tuning adjusts the model to bet-
ter match observed carbon and water dynamics by correcting biases inherited from
LPJmL. All model outputs used for training are normalized by their respective maxi-
mum value computed prior to model initialization, and all loss terms are defined using
the standard mean squared error (MSE) (Supplementary Information D.3, Eq. S23).
We use a rollout length that covers the entire crop growing period (from sowing to
harvest) to both pre-train and fine-tune NeuralCrop, which we find enables stable and
robust model training (Supplementary Information D.5). Although shorter rollouts
offer higher training efficiency, they often lead to loss oscillation and convergence
failures. This instability becomes more pronounced as the rollout length decreases,
highlighting the importance of incorporating the entire crop growing period into each
training rollout. We set a 365-day rollout as the default to train all NeuralCrop models
in our study.
Data sources and benchmarking
We select European wheat regions and the US Corn Belt over the period 2000-
2016 to evaluate the performance of NeuralCrop under both normal and extreme
climate conditions. These two large-scale cropping regions are selected because of
their long-term, high-quality eddy-covariance observations for fine-tuning, as well as
annual subnational crop yield statistics for evaluation. Yield data used for evalua-
tion are publicly available from the harmonized European Union subnational crop
statistics dataset [48] and the USDA-NASS database, as described in Supplemen-
tary Information G.1.1 and G.2.1. It’s noted that these two datasets are the most
reliable yield statistics from these regions but may not fully represent ground-truth
yields, as they are subject to potential errors due to reporting inaccuracies. The yield
14
simulations from the other 8 GGCMs, including ACEA [66], CROVER [67], EPIC-
IIASA [68], ISAM [69], LDNDC [70], LPJ-GUESS [71], PEPIC [72], pDSSAT [73], and
SIMPLACE-LINTUL5 [74], are accessible from AgMIP GGCMI Phase 3, providing
historical yield simulations up to 2016.
Yield data processing
We aggregate simulated yields to the corresponding subnational unit of reported yield
statistics (primarily NUTS-3 level in EU countries, and county level in the US) using
an area-weighted averaging method, respectively, as described in Supplementary Infor-
mation H.1. In European wheat regions, spring and winter wheat are simulated under
rain-fed and irrigated management conditions, which are jointly evaluated against
reported total wheat yields, including soft and durum wheat. In the US Corn Belt,
the corn is simulated under rain-fed and irrigated management conditions to compare
with reported corn yields. Prior to comparison, both simulated and reported yield time
series are detrended using a cubic smoothing spline to remove the effects of long-term
crop breeding advances and management improvements, thereby isolating the inter-
annual variability primarily driven by climate change, described in Supplementary
Information H.2.
Evaluation metrics
For interannual yield variability, we use the Pearson correlation coefficient (Supple-
mentary Information section E.1) as a metric to evaluate the model performance.
For yield anomalies, we use root mean square error (RMSE) (Supplementary Infor-
mation section E.3), or the coefficient of determination (R2, see Eq. S28), i.e., the
squared Pearson correlation coefficient (Supplementary Information section E.2) as
the evaluation metrics.
Data availability
For running LPJmL and training NeuralCrop, we used the bias-corrected climate
inputs from ISIMIP3a GSWP3-W5E5 datasets for the period 1901–2019, which are
publicly available for download at https://www.isimip.org/. The data for cultivated
area fraction and annual fertilizer rates were obtained from the LUH2v2 dataset [75].
The crop residue data were accessed from ref. [76]. The crop tillage management data
were obtained from ref. [77]. Soil properties (e.g., soil textures and pH) and crop sow-
ing dates were accessed from Agricultural Model Intercomparison and Improvement
Project (AgMIP) [45].
The flux data used to finetune NeuralCrop were obtained from the global
flux
network
FLUXNET2015
(https://fluxnet.org/data/fluxnet2015-dataset/)
and
FLUXNET-CH4
(https://fluxnet.org/data/fluxnet-ch4-community-product/),
the
American
flux
network
AmeriFlux
(https://ameriflux.lbl.gov/data/
flux-data-products/), and the European Integrated Carbon Observation System
(ICOS) (https://www.icos-cp.eu/data-products/).
15
The European subnational wheat statistics were downloaded from https://data.jrc.
ec.europa.eu/dataset/685949ff-56de-4646-a8df-844b5bb5f835, which provides annual
wheat (including soft and durum wheat) statistics on area, production, and average
yield across three levels of the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS).
The subnational corn statistics of the US Corn Belt were obtained from https://
quickstats.nass.usda.gov/. The yield simulations from the other GGCMs are available
at https://www.isimip.org/.
Code availability
The NeuralCrop Julia code will be available on GitHub when this work gets published.
Supplementary information
The manuscript is accompanied by Supplementary Information that describes in detail
how to develop, train, and validate NeuralCrop, as well as additional results.
Author contribution
Y.L., S.B., M.B., M.G., P.H. and N.B. conceived and designed the study. Y.L. wrote
the model code, processed the data, trained the models and analysed the results. J.H.
provided the yield comparison code. All authors discussed the results. Y.L. wrote the
manuscript with contributions from all authors.
Acknowledgements
Y.L. acknowledges funding from the program of the China Scholarship Council
(no.202303250017). N.B. and S.B. acknowledge funding from the Volkswagen Foun-
dation. This is ClimTip contribution #X; the ClimTip project has received funding
from the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme under
grant agreement no.101137601. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Ministry of
Research, Science and Culture (MWFK) of Land Brandenburg for supporting this
project by providing resources on the high performance computer system at the
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research.
16
References
[1] Yang, Y., Tilman, D., Jin, Z., Smith, P., Barrett, C.B., Zhu, Y.-G., Burney, J.,
D’Odorico, P., Fantke, P., Fargione, J., et al.: Climate change exacerbates the
environmental impacts of agriculture. Science 385(6713), 3747 (2024)
[2] Rezaei, E.E., Webber, H., Asseng, S., Boote, K., Durand, J.L., Ewert, F., Martre,
P., MacCarthy, D.S.: Climate change impacts on crop yields. nature reviews earth
& environment 4(12), 831–846 (2023)
[3] Hasegawa, T., Sakurai, G., Fujimori, S., Takahashi, K., Hijioka, Y., Masui, T.:
Extreme climate events increase risk of global food insecurity and adaptation
needs. Nature Food 2(8), 587–595 (2021)
[4] Hultgren, A., Carleton, T., Delgado, M., Gergel, D.R., Greenstone, M., Houser,
T., Hsiang, S., Jina, A., Kopp, R.E., Malevich, S.B., et al.: Impacts of climate
change on global agriculture accounting for adaptation. Nature 642(8068), 644–
652 (2025)
[5] Lesk, C., Rowhani, P., Ramankutty, N.: Influence of extreme weather disasters
on global crop production. Nature 529(7584), 84–87 (2016)
[6] J¨agermeyr, J., M¨uller, C., Ruane, A.C., Elliott, J., Balkovic, J., Castillo, O.,
Faye, B., Foster, I., Folberth, C., Franke, J.A., et al.: Climate impacts on global
agriculture emerge earlier in new generation of climate and crop models. Nature
Food 2(11), 873–885 (2021)
[7] Adrian, R., Craig, M., Degvold, F., Ebi, K.L., Frieler, K., Jamshed, A., McMil-
lan, J., Mechler, R., New, M., Simpson, N., et al.: Climate change 2022-impacts,
adaption and vulnerability. summary for policymakers (2022)
[8] Beier, F.D., Dietrich, J.P., Heinke, J., Abrahao, G., Jeetze, P., Bodirsky, B.L., et
al.: Planetary boundaries under a land-based climate change mitigation scenario
with a food demand transformation: a modelling study. The Lancet Planetary
Health 9(10), 101249 (2025) https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(25)00087-7
[9] Luchtenbelt, H., Doelman, J., Bos, A., Daioglou, V., J¨agermeyr, J., M¨uller, C.,
Stehfest, E., Vuuren, D.: Quantifying food security and mitigation risks con-
sequential to climate change impacts on crop yields. Environmental Research
Letters 20(1), 014001 (2024)
[10] Kahiluoto, H., Sakieh, Y., Kaseva, J., Kersebaum, K.-C., Minoli, S., Franke, J.,
R¨otter, R.P., M¨uller, C.: Redistribution of nitrogen to feed the people on a safer
planet. PNAS nexus 3(5), 170 (2024)
[11] Orlov, A., J¨agermeyr, J., M¨uller, C., Daloz, A.S., Zabel, F., Minoli, S., Liu, W.,
Lin, T.-S., Jain, A.K., Folberth, C., et al.: Human heat stress could offset potential
17
economic benefits of co2 fertilization in crop production under a high-emissions
scenario. One Earth 7(7), 1250–1265 (2024)
[12] Wang, B., J¨agermeyr, J., O’Leary, G.J., Wallach, D., Ruane, A.C., Feng, P., Li, L.,
Liu, D.L., Waters, C., Yu, Q., et al.: Pathways to identify and reduce uncertainties
in agricultural climate impact assessments. Nature Food 5(7), 550–556 (2024)
[13] Xiong, W., Asseng, S., Hoogenboom, G., Hernandez-Ochoa, I., Robertson, R.,
Sonder, K., Pequeno, D., Reynolds, M., Gerard, B.: Different uncertainty distri-
bution between high and low latitudes in modelling warming impacts on wheat.
Nature Food 1(1), 63–69 (2020)
[14] Asseng, S., Ewert, F., Rosenzweig, C., Jones, J.W., Hatfield, J.L., Ruane, A.C.,
Boote, K.J., Thorburn, P.J., R¨otter, R.P., Cammarano, D., et al.: Uncertainty
in simulating wheat yields under climate change. Nature climate change 3(9),
827–832 (2013)
[15] M¨uller, C., J¨agermeyr, J., Franke, J.A., Ruane, A.C., Balkovic, J., Ciais, P.,
Dury, M., Falloon, P., Folberth, C., Hank, T., Hoffmann, M., Izaurralde, R.C.,
Jacquemin, I., Khabarov, N., Liu, W., Olin, S., Pugh, T.A.M., Wang, X.,
Williams, K., Zabel, F., Elliott, J.W.: Substantial Differences in Crop Yield Sen-
sitivities Between Models Call for Functionality-Based Model Evaluation. Earth’s
Future 12(3), 2023–003773 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1029/2023EF003773
[16] Iizumi, T., Sakai, T.: The global dataset of historical yields for major crops 1981–
2016. Scientific Data 7(1), 97 (2020)
[17] Lee, H., Calvin, K., Dasgupta, D., Krinner, G., Mukherji, A., Thorne, P., Trisos,
C., Romero, J., Aldunce, P., Barrett, K., et al.: IPCC, 2023: Climate Change
2023: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, (2023)
[18] Koehler, A.-K.: Uncertainties in global crop modelling. Nature Food 1(1), 19–20
(2020)
[19] Sweet, L.-b., Athanasiadis, I.N., Bree, R., Castellano, A., Martre, P., Paudel,
D., Ruane, A.C., Zscheischler, J.: Transdisciplinary coordination is essential for
advancing agricultural modeling with machine learning. One Earth 8(4) (2025)
[20] Liu, L., Zhou, W., Guan, K., Peng, B., Xu, S., Tang, J., Zhu, Q., Till, J., Jia, X.,
Jiang, C., et al.: Knowledge-guided machine learning can improve carbon cycle
quantification in agroecosystems. Nature communications 15(1), 357 (2024)
[21] Van Klompenburg, T., Kassahun, A., Catal, C.: Crop yield prediction using
machine learning: A systematic literature review. Computers and electronics in
agriculture 177, 105709 (2020)
18
[22] Liu, W., Ye, T., M¨uller, C., J¨agermeyr, J., Franke, J.A., Stephens, H., Chen, S.:
The statistical emulators of ggcmi phase 2: responses of year-to-year variation of
crop yield to co 2, temperature, water, and nitrogen perturbations. Geoscientific
Model Development 16(23), 7203–7221 (2023)
[23] Folberth, C., Baklanov, A., Balkoviˇc, J., Skalsk`y, R., Khabarov, N., Obersteiner,
M.: Spatio-temporal downscaling of gridded crop model yield estimates based on
machine learning. Agricultural and forest meteorology 264, 1–15 (2019)
[24] Terven, J., Cordova-Esparza, D.-M., Romero-Gonz´alez, J.-A., Ram´ırez-Pedraza,
A., Ch´avez-Urbiola, E.: A comprehensive survey of loss functions and metrics in
deep learning. Artificial Intelligence Review 58(7), 195 (2025)
[25] Paudel, D., De Wit, A., Boogaard, H., Marcos, D., Osinga, S., Athanasiadis, I.N.:
Interpretability of deep learning models for crop yield forecasting. Computers and
Electronics in Agriculture 206, 107663 (2023)
[26] Tseng, G., Kerner, H., Nakalembe, C., Becker-Reshef, I.: Learning to predict crop
type from heterogeneous sparse labels using meta-learning. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
1111–1120 (2021)
[27] Reichstein, M., Camps-Valls, G., Stevens, B., Jung, M., Denzler, J., Carvalhais,
N., Prabhat, F.: Deep learning and process understanding for data-driven earth
system science. Nature 566(7743), 195–204 (2019)
[28] Irrgang, C., Boers, N., Sonnewald, M., Barnes, E.A., Kadow, C., Staneva, J.,
Saynisch-Wagner, J.: Towards neural earth system modelling by integrating arti-
ficial intelligence in earth system science. Nature Machine Intelligence 3(8),
667–674 (2021)
[29] Gelbrecht, M., White, A., Bathiany, S., Boers, N.: Differentiable programming
for earth system modeling. Geoscientific Model Development 16(11), 3123–3135
(2023)
[30] Shen, C., Appling, A.P., Gentine, P., Bandai, T., Gupta, H., Tartakovsky, A.,
Baity-Jesi, M., Fenicia, F., Kifer, D., Li, L., et al.: Differentiable modelling to unify
machine learning and physical models for geosciences. Nature Reviews Earth &
Environment 4(8), 552–567 (2023)
[31] Liu, Y., Huang, H., Wang, S.-C., Zhang, T., Xu, D., Chen, Y.: Elm2. 1-xgbfire1.
0: improving wildfire prediction by integrating a machine learning fire model in a
land surface model. Geoscientific Model Development 18(13), 4103–4117 (2025)
[32] Kochkov, D., Yuval, J., Langmore, I., Norgaard, P., Smith, J., Mooers, G., Kl¨ower,
M., Lottes, J., Rasp, S., D¨uben, P., et al.: Neural general circulation models for
weather and climate. Nature 632(8027), 1060–1066 (2024)
19
[33] Zhang, C., Perezhogin, P., Gultekin, C., Adcroft, A., Fernandez-Granda, C.,
Zanna, L.: Implementation and evaluation of a machine learned mesoscale eddy
parameterization into a numerical ocean circulation model. Journal of Advances
in Modeling Earth Systems 15(10), 2023–003697 (2023)
[34] Bloh, M., Lobell, D., Asseng, S.: Knowledge informed hybrid machine learning
in agricultural yield prediction. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 227,
109606 (2024)
[35] Droutsas, I., Challinor, A.J., Deva, C.R., Wang, E.: Integration of machine learn-
ing into process-based modelling to improve simulation of complex crop responses.
in silico Plants 4(2), 017 (2022)
[36] Maestrini, B., Mimi´c, G., Oort, P.A., Jindo, K., Brdar, S., Athanasiadis, I.N.,
Evert, F.K.: Mixing process-based and data-driven approaches in yield prediction.
European Journal of Agronomy 139, 126569 (2022)
[37] Shahhosseini, M., Hu, G., Huber, I., Archontoulis, S.V.: Coupling machine learn-
ing and crop modeling improves crop yield prediction in the us corn belt. Scientific
reports 11(1), 1606 (2021)
[38] Schaphoff, S., Bloh, W., Rammig, A., Thonicke, K., Biemans, H., Forkel, M.,
Gerten, D., Heinke, J., J¨agermeyr, J., Knauer, J., et al.: LPJmL4–a dynamic
global vegetation model with managed land–part 1: Model description. Geosci-
entific Model Development 11(4), 1343–1375 (2018)
[39] Bondeau, A., Smith, P.C., Zaehle, S., Schaphoff, S., Lucht, W., Cramer, W.,
Gerten, D., LOTZE-CAMPEN, H., M¨uller, C., Reichstein, M., et al.: Modelling
the role of agriculture for the 20th century global terrestrial carbon balance.
Global Change Biology 13(3), 679–706 (2007)
[40] Bloh, W., Schaphoff, S., M¨uller, C., Rolinski, S., Waha, K., Zaehle, S.: Imple-
menting the nitrogen cycle into the dynamic global vegetation, hydrology, and
crop growth model lpjml (version 5.0). Geoscientific Model Development 11(7),
2789–2812 (2018)
[41] Lutz, F., Herzfeld, T., Heinke, J., Rolinski, S., Schaphoff, S., Von Bloh, W., Stoor-
vogel, J.J., M¨uller, C.: Simulating the effect of tillage practices with the global
ecosystem model lpjml (version 5.0-tillage). Geoscientific Model Development
12(6), 2419–2440 (2019)
[42] Franke, J.A., M¨uller, C., Elliott, J., Ruane, A.C., J¨agermeyr, J., Balkovic, J.,
Ciais, P., Dury, M., Falloon, P.D., Folberth, C., et al.: The ggcmi phase 2 exper-
iment: global gridded crop model simulations under uniform changes in co 2,
temperature, water, and nitrogen levels (protocol version 1.0). Geoscientific Model
Development 13(5), 2315–2336 (2020)
20
[43] Frieler, K., Volkholz, J., Lange, S., Schewe, J., Mengel, M., Roc´ıo Rivas L´opez, M.,
Otto, C., Reyer, C.P., Karger, D.N., Malle, J.T., et al.: Scenario setup and forcing
data for impact model evaluation and impact attribution within the third round of
the inter-sectoral impact model intercomparison project (isimip3a). Geoscientific
Model Development 17(1), 1–51 (2024)
[44] M¨uller, C., Robertson, R.D.: Projecting future crop productivity for global
economic modeling. Agricultural Economics 45(1), 37–50 (2014)
[45] M¨uller, C., Elliott, J., Chryssanthacopoulos, J., Arneth, A., Balkovic, J., Ciais, P.,
Deryng, D., Folberth, C., Glotter, M., Hoek, S., et al.: Global gridded crop model
evaluation: benchmarking, skills, deficiencies and implications. Geoscientific
Model Development 10(4), 1403–1422 (2017)
[46] J¨agermeyr, J., Pastor, A., Biemans, H., Gerten, D.: Reconciling irrigated food
production with environmental flows for sustainable development goals imple-
mentation. Nature communications 8(1), 15900 (2017)
[47] Schaphoff, S., Forkel, M., M¨uller, C., Knauer, J., Von Bloh, W., Gerten,
D., J¨agermeyr, J., Lucht, W., Rammig, A., Thonicke, K., et al.: Lpjml4–a
dynamic global vegetation model with managed land–part 2: Model evaluation.
Geoscientific Model Development 11(4), 1377–1403 (2018)
[48] Ronchetti, G., Nisini Scacchiafichi, L., Seguini, L., Cerrani, I., Velde, M.: Harmo-
nized european union subnational crop statistics can reveal climate impacts and
crop cultivation shifts. Earth System Science Data 16(3), 1623–1649 (2024)
[49] Lobell, D.B., Deines, J.M., Tommaso, S.D.: Changes in the drought sensitivity of
us maize yields. Nature Food 1(11), 729–735 (2020)
[50] Vicente-Serrano, S.M., Beguer´ıa, S., L´opez-Moreno, J.I.: A multiscalar drought
index sensitive to global warming: the standardized precipitation evapotranspi-
ration index. Journal of climate 23(7), 1696–1718 (2010)
[51] N´oia J´unior, R.d.S., Deswarte, J.-C., Cohan, J.-P., Martre, P., Der Velde, M.,
Lecerf, R., Webber, H., Ewert, F., Ruane, A.C., Slafer, G.A., et al.: The extreme
2016 wheat yield failure in france. Global Change Biology 29(11), 3130–3146
(2023)
[52] Zipper, S.C., Qiu, J., Kucharik, C.J.: Drought effects on us maize and soy-
bean production: spatiotemporal patterns and historical changes. Environmental
Research Letters 11(9), 094021 (2016)
[53] Deines, J.M., Archontoulis, S.V., Huber, I., Lobell, D.B.: Observational evidence
for groundwater influence on crop yields in the united states. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 121(36), 2400085121 (2024)
21
[54] Frieler, K., Schauberger, B., Arneth, A., Balkoviˇc, J., Chryssanthacopoulos, J.,
Deryng, D., Elliott, J., Folberth, C., Khabarov, N., M¨uller, C., et al.: Under-
standing the weather signal in national crop-yield variability. Earth’s Future 5(6),
605–616 (2017)
[55] Garcia-Vila, M., Santos Vianna, M., Harrison, M.T., Liu, K., S. N´oia-J´unior, R.,
Weber, T.K., Zhao, J., Acutis, M., Archontoulis, S., Asseng, S., et al.: Gaps and
strategies for accurate simulation of waterlogging impacts on crop productivity.
Nature Food, 1–10 (2025)
[56] Proctor, J., Zeppetello, L.V., Chan, D., Huybers, P.: Climate change increases
the interannual variance of summer crop yields globally through changes in
temperature and water supply. Science Advances 11(36), 3575 (2025)
[57] Heinicke, S., Frieler, K., J¨agermeyr, J., Mengel, M.: Global gridded crop mod-
els underestimate yield responses to droughts and heatwaves. Environmental
Research Letters 17(4), 044026 (2022)
[58] N´oia J´unior, R.d.S., Asseng, S., M¨uller, C., Deswarte, J.-C., Cohan, J.-P., Martre,
P.: Negative impacts of climate change on crop yields are underestimated. Trends
Plant Sci. 30(11), 1262–1273 (2025) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2025.05.
002
[59] Ben-Ari, T., Bo´e, J., Ciais, P., Lecerf, R., Velde, M., Makowski, D.: Causes and
implications of the unforeseen 2016 extreme yield loss in the breadbasket of france.
Nature communications 9(1), 1627 (2018)
[60] Pastorello, G., Trotta, C., Canfora, E., Chu, H., Christianson, D., Cheah, Y.-W.,
Poindexter, C., Chen, J., Elbashandy, A., Humphrey, M., et al.: The fluxnet2015
dataset and the oneflux processing pipeline for eddy covariance data. Scientific
data 7(1), 225 (2020)
[61] Chu, H., Christianson, D.S., Cheah, Y.-W., Pastorello, G., O’Brien, F., Geden,
J., Ngo, S.-T., Hollowgrass, R., Leibowitz, K., Beekwilder, N.F., et al.: Ameriflux
base data pipeline to support network growth and data sharing. Scientific Data
10(1), 614 (2023)
[62] Gelbrecht, M., Kl¨ower, M., Boers, N.: Pseudospectralnet: Toward hybrid atmo-
spheric models for climate simulations. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth
Systems 17(10), 2025–004969 (2025)
[63] Chen, R.T., Rubanova, Y., Bettencourt, J., Duvenaud, D.K.: Neural ordinary
differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems 31
(2018)
[64] Bezanson, J., Edelman, A., Karpinski, S., Shah, V.B.: Julia: A fresh approach to
numerical computing. SIAM review 59(1), 65–98 (2017)
22
[65] Innes, M.: Don’t unroll adjoint: Differentiating ssa-form programs. CoRR
abs/1810.07951 (2018) arXiv:1810.07951
[66] Mialyk, O., Schyns, J.F., Booij, M.J., Su, H., Hogeboom, R.J., Berger, M.: Water
footprints and crop water use of 175 individual crops for 1990–2019 simulated
with a global crop model. Scientific data 11(1), 206 (2024)
[67] Okada, M., Iizumi, T., Sakurai, G., Hanasaki, N., Sakai, T., Okamoto, K.,
Yokozawa, M.: Modeling irrigation-based climate change adaptation in agricul-
ture: Model development and evaluation in northeast china. Journal of Advances
in Modeling Earth Systems 7(3), 1409–1424 (2015)
[68] Balkoviˇc, J., Velde, M., Skalsk`y, R., Xiong, W., Folberth, C., Khabarov, N.,
Smirnov, A., Mueller, N.D., Obersteiner, M.: Global wheat production poten-
tials and management flexibility under the representative concentration pathways.
Global and Planetary Change 122, 107–121 (2014)
[69] Song, Y., Jain, A., McIsaac, G.: Implementation of dynamic crop growth processes
into a land surface model: evaluation of energy, water and carbon fluxes under
corn and soybean rotation. Biogeosciences 10(12), 8039–8066 (2013)
[70] Haas, E., Klatt, S., Fr¨ohlich, A., Kraft, P., Werner, C., Kiese, R., Grote, R.,
Breuer, L., Butterbach-Bahl, K.: Landscapedndc: a process model for simulation
of biosphere–atmosphere–hydrosphere exchange processes at site and regional
scale. Landscape ecology 28(4), 615–636 (2013)
[71] Ma, J., Olin, S., Anthoni, P., Rabin, S.S., Bayer, A.D., Nyawira, S.S., Arneth,
A.: Modeling symbiotic biological nitrogen fixation in grain legumes globally with
lpj-guess (v4. 0, r10285). Geoscientific Model Development 15(2), 815–839 (2022)
[72] Williams, J., Jones, C., Kiniry, J., Spanel, D.A.: The epic crop growth model.
Transactions of the ASAE 32(2), 497–0511 (1989)
[73] Jones, J.W., Hoogenboom, G., Porter, C.H., Boote, K.J., Batchelor, W.D., Hunt,
L.A., Wilkens, P.W., Singh, U., Gijsman, A.J., Ritchie, J.T.: The dssat cropping
system model. European journal of agronomy 18(3-4), 235–265 (2003)
[74] Enders, A., Vianna, M., Gaiser, T., Krauss, G., Webber, H., Srivastava, A.K.,
Seidel, S.J., Tewes, A., Rezaei, E.E., Ewert, F.: Simplace—a versatile modelling
and simulation framework for sustainable crops and agroecosystems. in silico
Plants 5(1), 006 (2023)
[75] Hurtt, G.C., Chini, L., Sahajpal, R., Frolking, S., Bodirsky, B.L., Calvin, K.,
Doelman, J.C., Fisk, J., Fujimori, S., Goldewijk, K.K., et al.: Harmonization of
global land-use change and management for the period 850–2100 (luh2) for cmip6.
Geoscientific Model Development Discussions 2020, 1–65 (2020)
23
[76] Dietrich, J.P., Mishra, A., Weindl, I., Bodirsky, B.L., Wang, X., Baumstark, L.,
Kreidenweis, U., Klein, D., Steinmetz, N., Chen, D., Humpenoeder, F., von Jeetze,
P., Wirth, S., Beier, F., Hoetten, D., Sauer, P., Tommey, J.: mrland: MadRaT land
data package. Version: 0.65.11 (2025). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3822083 .
https://github.com/pik-piam/mrland
[77] Porwollik, V., Rolinski, S., Heinke, J., M¨uller, C.: Generating a rule-based global
gridded tillage dataset. Earth System Science Data 11(2), 823–843 (2019)
24
Extended Data Figures
Fig. 6 Correlation coefficient difference between NeuralCrop and GGCMs in European wheat
regions. a, Boxplots of the correlation coefficient difference between NeuralCrop and LPJmL at the
subnational level, aggregated by country for the period 2000–2016, with countries ordered alpha-
betically by their country code (A–Z). The box boundaries represent the interquartile range (IQR),
defined by the first quartile, the median, and the third quartile. The upper and lower whiskers rep-
resent the maximum and minimum values that are within 1.5 times the interquartile range of the
box. The black triangles are the mean values. NeuralCrop outperforms (underperforms) LPJmL in
16 (10) of the 26 countries. b, Same as panel a but for the correlation coefficient difference between
NeuralCrop and AgMIP (the ensemble median of 8 GGCMs). NeuralCrop outperforms (underper-
forms) LPJmL in 19 (7) of the 26 countries.
25
Fig. 7 Correlation coefficient difference between NeuralCrop and GGCMs in the US Corn Belt,
including nine states (i.e., South Dakota, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Wisconsin, Illinois, Michigan,
Indiana, and Ohio). a, Boxplots of the correlation coefficient difference between NeuralCrop and
LPJmL at the county level, aggregated by state for the period 2000–2016. The box boundaries rep-
resent the interquartile range (IQR), defined by the first quartile, the median, and the third quartile.
The upper and lower whiskers represent the maximum and minimum values that are within 1.5 times
the interquartile range of the box. The black triangles are the mean values. NeuralCrop outperforms
(underperforms) LPJmL in 7 (2) of the 9 states. b, Same as panel a but for the correlation coeffi-
cient difference between NeuralCrop and AgMIP (the ensemble median of 8 GGCMs). NeuralCrop
outperforms (underperforms) LPJmL in 4 (5) of the 9 states.
26
Fig. 8 Simulated corn yield anomalies (%) by AgMIP (the ensemble median of 8 GGCMs) against
USDA statistics (benchmark). The color gradient indicates the density of data points, and the dashed
line represents the 1:1 line. R2 and RMSE values are shown in the upper left.
27
Fig. 9 Inference time of GPU-accelerated NeuralCrop and CPU-based LPJmL simulating for a
0.5◦× 0.5◦spatial resolution with daily time steps over a 20-year simulation period (7300 days) at
different grid cells. NeuralCrop was running on one single NVIDIA H100 GPU with 80GB of memory,
and LPJmL was running on one single AMD EPYC 9554 CPU with 128 cores and 768GB of memory.
28
Supplementary information
A Hybrid architecture
31
A.1 Dynamical Core of NeuralCrop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
A.2 Neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
A.3 Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
B Trainable components of NeuralCrop
33
B.1
Photosynthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
B.2
Crop carbon allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
B.3
Soil and litter carbon cycle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
B.4
Soil and litter nitrogen cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
B.5
Soil water cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
C Data
40
C.1 Initial conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
C.2 Pre-training data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
C.3 Fine-tuning data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
C.4 Data pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
D Training
43
D.1 Input data normalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
D.2 Optimizer settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
D.3 Loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
D.4 Training sequence length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
D.5 Training rollouts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
D.6 Output rescaling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
D.7 Training resources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
E Evaluation metrics
47
E.1
Pearson correlation coefficient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
E.2
Coefficient of determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
E.3
Root mean square error
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
F In situ validation
48
F.1
In situ sites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
F.2
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
F.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
G Large-scale cropping regions
55
G.1 European wheat
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
G.1.1
Subnational crop statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
G.1.2
Pre-training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
G.1.3
Fine-tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
G.2 US Corn Belt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
29
G.2.1
County-level crop statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
G.2.2
Pre-training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
G.2.3
Fine-tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
G.3 Out-of-sample generalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
G.4 SPEI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
H Yield data processing
64
H.1 Yield aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
H.2 Yield detrending
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
H.3 Yield anomalies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
I
Additional information
66
I.1
Case study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
I.2
France wheat anomalies in 2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
30
A Hybrid architecture
A.1 Dynamical Core of NeuralCrop
NeuralCrop distinguishes between diagnostic and prognostic variables. Diagnostic vari-
ables, such as leaf area index (LAI) and gross primary productivity (GPP), represent
instantaneous system states that are not explicitly dependent on the system’s tem-
poral evolution. Prognostic variables, such as carbon pools, nitrogen pools and soil
water pools, govern the dynamic evolution of the system states over time. They are
represented by coupled ordinary differential equations (ODEs) that form the dynam-
ical core of NeuralCrop in crop carbon, nitrogen, and water cycles, as described in
detail in Section B. At each time step, diagnostic variables are updated based on the
computed prognostic variables.
A.2 Neural network
In NeuralCrop, we combine fully-connected neural networks with process-based com-
ponents, which are designed to learn key process representations from observational
data, to reduce ’hidden’ uncertainties inherent in process-based GGCMs. For diagnos-
tic variables replaced or augmented by neural networks, we use a 5-layer MLP with
ReLU activations and 384 hidden neurons. To capture temporal dependencies and con-
tinuous dynamics, we naturally use neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs) [1]
to model prognostic variables, which are parameterized by a 3-layer MLP with ReLU
activations and 384 hidden neurons. To solve the NODEs, we use a forward Euler
solver with a fixed time step ∆t = 1 day. At each time step t, the prognostic variable
X(t) is updated according to:
X(t + ∆t) = X(t) + ∆t · fθ(X(t), t)
(S1)
where fθ denotes the MLP that outputs the learned tendencies.
A.3 Implementation
NeuralCrop adopts robust physical representations of ecosystem processes governing
carbon, water, energy, and nitrogen fluxes from LPJmL, a state-of-the-art process-
based model in simulating natural and agricultural ecosystems. To enable seamless
integration with machine learning components, we translated the C-based crop module
of LPJmL into Julia, a high-performance language designed for numerical and scientific
computing [2]. The Julia ecosystem for scientific machine learning (SciML) provides
native support for differential equations [3], which naturally fits well with our hybrid
modelling approach using ODEs as the core of system dynamics.
We implement the ML components of NeuralCrop using Lux.jl [4, 5], a neural
network framework built entirely with pure functions that are friendly to both compil-
ers and automatic differentiation. We train the ML components of NeuralCrop using
Zygote.jl [6], a high-performance automatic differentiation (AD) framework in Julia
that enables efficient gradient-based optimization, accelerated by CUDA.jl [7, 8]. Dur-
ing training, the gradients of neural networks are computed via direct reverse-mode
31
differentiation, including the forward Euler solver used for the NODEs (i.e., gradi-
ents are obtained by backpropagating through the Euler solver rather than using
adjoint methods). To support full graphics-processing-unit (GPU) compatibility and
improve computational efficiency, we implement the process-based components using
KernelAbstractions.jl [9], which allows both neural networks and process-based parts
to be parallelized and executed within a unified GPU-accelerated framework.
32
B Trainable components of NeuralCrop
A detailed description of the model components of LPJmL can be found in Schaphoff
et al.[10]. In this section, we focus on the components replaced or augmented by
neural networks within NeuralCrop. The overall data flow in the learned components
of NeuralCrop is shown in Fig. S1.
Photosynthesis 
(MLP)
Crop carbon allocation 
(NODE)
Soil and litter carbon cycle 
(NODE)
Soil water cycle 
(NODE)
Soil and litter nitrogen cycle 
(NODE)
augmented
replaced
Climate forcing
temperature
CO2
preciptation
radiation
Extra features
day length
APAR
soil Ks
GPP
NPP
soil moisture
Extra features
crop respiration
leaf area index
crop nitrogen
soil temperature
APAR: absorbed photosynthetically active radiation
Ks: saturated hydraulic conductivity
GPP: gross primary production
NPP: net primary production
Fig. S1 Schematic of the data flow in the learned components of NeuralCrop.
B.1 Photosynthesis
The photosynthesis scheme follows a ’big leaf’ model developed by Farquhar et al [11,
12], and improved by Collatz et al [13, 14] and Prentice et al [15, 16]. The daily
gross photosynthesis rate Agd
 g C m−2 day−1
is calculated as the co-limited minimum
of the light-limited photosynthesis rate JE
 mol C m−2 h−1
and the Rubisco-limited
photosynthesis rate JC
 mol C m−2 h−1
. The corresponding equations are:
JE = C1 ·
APAR
daylength,
(S2)
where C1 is a temperature stress and stomatal conductance–related coefficient, APAR
is the absorbed photosynthetically active radiation, and daylength is the length of day
time.
JC = C2 · Vmax,
(S3)
33
where C2 is the stomatal conductance-related coefficient, and Vmax is the maximum
Rubisco capacity.
Agd =

JE + JC −
p
(JE + JC)2 −4 · θ · JE · JC

2 · θ · daylength
,
(S4)
where θ is the co-limitation coefficient of light and Rubisco activity.
Here, we only present the final equation to obtain Agd (Eq. S4) and omit the
intermediate derivation steps, which are already described in detail in Schaphoff et
al.[10]. In order to compute the optimal ratio of the inter-cellular to atmospheric CO2
concentration, λ, the following equation must be solved (Eq. S5).
And + (1 −daylength/24) · Rleaf −pa · (gc −gmin) · (1 −λ)/1.6 = 0,
(S5)
where And is daily net photosynthesis rate, Rleaf is leaf respiration, pa is the atmo-
spheric partial pressure of CO2, gc is canopy conductance, gmin is vegetation (crop)
specific minimum canopy conductance. However, an analytical solution is not feasi-
ble because λ appears both directly in the equation and indirectly through And. In
LPJmL, a bisection algorithm is used to iteratively solve the equation and determine
the value of λ, which introduces high computational cost when conducting large-scale,
high-resolution simulations.
To address this bottleneck, we replace the root-finding algorithm with a 5-layer
MLP to emulate the solution for λ, which approximates the nonlinear relationship
between environmental variables (i.e., day length, air temperature, and soil moisture)
and the corresponding optimal value of λ. Compared to the bisection algorithm, the
neural network-based emulator can significantly accelerate the photosynthesis compu-
tation, which is due to the fact that neural networks only need one forward pass for
inference, while root-finding algorithms involve iterative evaluations.
Additionally, we use a second 5-layer MLP to simulate the maximum Rubisco
capacity Vmax, originally computed using an empirical formulation (Eq. S6).
Vmax = (Nleaf −NCleaf, low · Cleaf)/(p · exp(ktemp · (T −25)) · LAI) · daylength (S6)
where Nleaf is the leaf nitrogen content, Cleaf is the leaf carbon content, NCleaf, low is
the crop-specific lower ratio of leaf carbon and nitrogen, p is the static coefficient, ktemp
is the factor of temperature dependence of nitrogen demand for Rubisco activity, T is
the air temperature, LAI is the leaf area index. Instead of relying on a fixed empirical
relationship, this neural network is trained using observational data to capture more
complex and potentially nonlinear interactions between Vmax and its environmental
and biochemical drivers (i.e., day length, APAR, leaf nitrogen, and air temperature).
Furthermore, we implement the photosynthesis module to be fully differentiable.
By leveraging observational GPP, we are able to optimize λ and Vmax through gradient-
based ’online training’, which helps mitigate ”hidden” biases introduced by the original
empirical formulation of λ and Vmax.
34
B.2 Crop carbon allocation
In LPJmL, crop carbon allocation is governed by a set of heuristic rules driven by
phenological development stage, organ priority, and stress factors. Daily NPP (net
gross productivity) accumulates to total biomass, which is then allocated to crop
organs in a hierarchical order: root, leaf, storage organ, mobile reserve, and stem [10].
The carbon allocation equations are:
Croot = froot · biomass,
(S7)
Cleaf = LAI
sla ,
(S8)
Cso = HI · (1 −froot) · biomass,
(S9)
Cpool = biomass −Croot −Cleaf −Cso.
(S10)
where froot is the root carbon allocation coefficient (co-limited by water and nitrogen
stress), sla is the specific leaf area, HI is the harvest index (limited by water stress).
The daily carbon allocation is computed based solely on the current phenological and
environmental conditions without tracking the dynamic evolution of carbon pools over
time, which limits its ability to represent feedbacks and lagged responses.
The matrix-based carbon allocation framework proposed by Luo et al.[17] provides
a promising approach to model carbon allocation dynamics. By representing carbon
allocation as a system of ODEs(Eq. S11), it captures the temporal evolution of carbon
pools in a continuous and prognostic manner.
dC(t)
dt
= A(C, t)µ(t) + B(C, t)ξ(t)K(C, t)C(t),
(S11)
where C(t) denotes the vector of carbon compartments, A(C, t) is a vector of allo-
cation coefficients, µ(t) is carbon input (e.g., NPP), B(C, t) is a matrix of transfer
coefficients, ξ(t) is a matrix of environmental modifiers, K(C, t) is a matrix of turnover
coefficients. Despite its advantages, a key challenge of the matrix-based formulation
is the parameterization of the matrices A, B, and K, which requires detailed mech-
anistic assumptions or extensive calibration. Such parameterizations are often poorly
constrained and exhibit high spatial heterogeneity, making it difficult to apply the
model robustly under diverse environmental and management conditions.
Here, we further extend the matrix approach using neural ordinary differential
equations (NODEs), where the right-hand side of ODEs is replaced by neural net-
works [1]. Specifically, we use a 3-layer MLP to parameterize the carbon allocation
dynamics (the right-hand side of Eq. S11) implicitly based on carbon pool states
and external inputs (i.e., NPP, LAI, leaf nitrogen, and soil moisture). This NODE-
based formulation avoids explicitly prescribing the allocation, transfer, and turnover
coefficients while introducing data-driven flexibility to better capture the complexity
and variability of crop-environment interactions. Our choice of matrix approach was
also motivated by our desire for efficient running on machine learning accelerators, in
particular GPUs, which are highly optimized for matrix operations.
35
B.3 Soil and litter carbon cycle
Agricultural soil and litter carbon play a crucial role in the global carbon balance under
climate change. In LPJmL, the litter carbon consists of three litter pools, including
two above-ground leaf and stem litter carbon pools and one below-ground root litter
carbon pool. The soil carbon is simulated across five vertical soil layers (0.2, 0.3, 0.5,
1, and 1 meter thickness) with a fast and a slow organic carbon pool in each layer [18].
LPJmL uses discrete-time balance equations to update each soil and litter carbon pool.
Based on the matrix approach, we reformulated the soil and litter carbon balance as
explicit ODEs (Eqs. S12 - S14), which are well suited for parallel execution on GPUs.
dClitter(t, l)
dt
= Alitter · Cresidue −(1 −exp(−klitter10 · flitter(t, l))) · Clitter(t, l), (S12)
with l = 1, 2, 3,
where Cresidue denotes the crop residues after crops are harvested, Alitter is the crop
residue partitioning coefficients, klitter10 is the static litter carbon decomposition rate
at 10 ◦C, flitter(t, l) is the carbon decomposition response function. Above-ground litter
carbon decomposition depends on air temperature and soil moisture, whereas below-
ground litter carbon decomposition depends on soil temperature and soil moisture.
The second term of Eq. S12 is the daily decomposed litter carbon, at which 70% of
decomposed litter carbon directly enters the atmosphere as litter respiration, and the
remaining goes into the soil carbon pools, with 98.5% to the fast soil carbon pools
and 1.5% to the slow carbon pools [18].
dCfast(t, l)
dt
= Afastµ(t) −(1 −exp(−kfast10 · ffast(t, l))) · Cfast(t, l),
(S13)
dCslow(t, l)
dt
= Aslowµ(t) −(1 −exp(−kslow10 · fslow(t, l))) · Cslow(t, l),
(S14)
with l = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
where µ(t) is the carbon input from decomposed litter carbon, Afast and Aslow are
the carbon input partitioning coefficients across five layers, kfast0 and kslow0 are the
static soil carbon decomposition rate at 10 ◦C, ffast(t, l) and fslow(t, l) are the carbon
decomposition response functions which depends on soil temperature and soil mois-
ture. Both the second term of Eq. S13 and Eq. S14 are the daily decomposed soil
carbon, which directly goes into the atmosphere as soil respiration.
The original formulation of the response function is a cubic polynomial equation:
f = exp

308.56 ·

1
56.02 −
1
T + 46.02

·
 0.0402 −5.005 · θ3 + 4.269 · θ2 + 0.719 · θ

,
(S15)
where (T) denotes air or soil temperature, θ is soil moisture. We replace the decompo-
sition response functions flitter(t, l), ffast(t, l), and fslow(t, l) in Eqs. S12 - S14 with a
36
3-layer MLP that takes both soil temperature and soil moisture as inputs, respectively.
This allows the model to flexibly capture nonlinear environmental effects in a fully
data-driven manner, rather than relying on fixed cubic polynomial response functions.
B.4 Soil and litter nitrogen cycle
In LPJmL, the soil and litter nitrogen cycle is tightly coupled to the soil and litter car-
bon cycle and follows a structurally similar formulation, including three litter nitrogen
pools and a fast and a slow nitrogen pool in each soil layer [19]. We also reformulated
the soil and litter nitrogen balance as explicit ODEs (Eqs. S16-S18).
dNlitter(t, l)
dt
= Alitter · Nresidue −(1 −exp(−klitter10 · flitter(t, l))) · Nlitter(t, l), (S16)
with l = 1, 2, 3,
where Nresidue denotes the crop residues after crops are harvested, Alitter is the crop
residue partitioning coefficients, klitter10 is the static litter nitrogen decomposition rate
at 10 ◦C, flitter(t, l) is the nitrogen decomposition response function. Above-ground
litter nitrogen decomposition depends on air temperature and soil moisture, whereas
below-ground litter nitrogen decomposition depends on soil temperature and soil mois-
ture. The second term of Eq. S16 is the daily decomposed litter nitrogen, at which 70%
of decomposed litter nitrogen directly enters the atmosphere as litter respiration, and
the remaining goes into the soil nitrogen pools, with 98.5% to the fast soil nitrogen
pools and 1.5% to the slow nitrogen pools [18].
dNfast(t, l)
dt
= Afastµ(t) −(1 −exp(−kfast10 · ffast(t, l))) · Nfast(t, l),
(S17)
dNslow(t, l)
dt
= Aslowµ(t) −(1 −exp(−kslow10 · fslow(t, l))) · Nslow(t, l),
(S18)
with l = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
where µ(t) is the nitrogen input from decomposed litter nitrogen, Afast and Aslow
are the nitrogen input partitioning coefficients across five layers, kfast0 and kslow0 are
the static soil nitrogen decomposition rate at 10 ◦C, ffast(t, l) and fslow(t, l) are the
nitrogen decomposition response functions which depends on soil temperature and soil
moisture. Both the second term of Eq. S17 and Eq. S18 are the daily decomposed soil
nitrogen, which directly goes into the atmosphere as soil respiration.
The original formulation of the response function follows Eq. S15. We replace the
decomposition response functions flitter(t, l), ffast(t, l), and fslow(t, l) in Eqs. S16 -
S18 with a 3-layer MLP that takes both soil temperature and soil moisture as inputs,
respectively. This allows the model to flexibly capture nonlinear environmental effects
in a fully data-driven manner, rather than relying on fixed cubic polynomial response
functions.
37
B.5 Soil water cycle
Similar to soil carbon and nitrogen, soil water in LPJmL is represented by five hydro-
logically active layers. Rather than explicitly solving the governing partial differential
equations [10, 20], LPJmL simulates daily soil-water dynamics with a computationally
efficient bucket model as follows:
Wt = Wt−1 + ∆t

(P + M + Irr −EI) −R −(ES + ET ) −p

,
(S19)
where W is the absolute soil water content in a specific soil layer, P is the precipitation,
M is the snowmelt, Irr is the irrigation water, EI is the interception loss from leaves,
R is the runoff, ES is the soil evaporation, ET is the plant transpiration, and p is the
percolation. The ∆t is the model time step, which is fixed to one day in LPJmL so
that all flux terms are expressed as daily rates. LPJmL assumes that ES occurs only in
bare soil with vegetation cover less than 100% and that water required for evaporation
is available from the top 0.3 meters of soil. The soil water accessible for ET depends
on the root depth of vegetation. The structure of Eq. S19 is inherently discrete but
equivalent to an explicit first-order ODE for a fixed time step. We reformulated it
as a first-order ODE (Eq. S20), which allows the use of differentiable ODE solvers,
enabling efficient gradient-based optimization for ML models.
dW
dt = (P + M + Irr −EI) −R −(ES + ET ) −p.
(S20)
Compared to the soil carbon cycle, the soil water cycle is inherently more com-
plex, involving a broader range of interacting processes, which leads to significantly
higher uncertainty in predictions. Although the ODE-based soil water representation
(Eq. S20) is numerically tractable, it relies on empirical formulas and fixed parameters.
Such simplifications limit its ability to capture the complex spatio-temporal nonlin-
ear processes, especially under diverse land cover types, soil properties, and climatic
conditions.
To address the above limitations of Eq. S20, we integrate neural networks with
soil water processes to augment the traditional process-based formulation with data-
driven flexibility. We could use neural networks to replace the entire right-hand side
of Eq. S20 to get a fully data-driven soil water representation, or replace only spe-
cific sub-processes to get a hybrid model. To compare both approaches, we implement
a 3-layer MLP to replace M and ES leading to a hybrid model, and a 3-layer MLP
to fully emulate the daily soil water dynamics, respectively. The reason to replace M
and ES was based purely on empirical evidence. Through extensive testing, we found
that replacing these two sub-processes yielded the most stable long-term simulations,
whereas replacing other or additional sub-processes often led to simulation instability
due to weakened sub-process constraints. Moreover, M involves a complex heuristic
snowmelt formulation, and using a neural network to emulate it can substantially
reduce model complexity. These two models were trained using mean squared error as
the training objective. Results indicate that the hybrid approach better captures the
daily dynamics of soil water content both in-sample and out-of-sample scenarios than
38
Fig. S2 Comparison of soil water content (SWC) simulated by hybrid and pure machine learning
models under in-sample and out-of-sample scenarios, with LPJmL-simulated SWC used as baseline.
Panels a and b show in-sample performance for the hybrid and pure machine learning models, respec-
tively, while panels c and d present their out-of-sample performance.
the fully data-driven alternative, as shown in Fig. S2. Due to the physical constraints
of process-based components, the hybrid model more accurately captures rapid fluc-
tuations in SWC and maintains consistency with the baseline across both in-sample
and out-of-sample scenarios (Fig. S2, panels a and c), whereas the pure machine learn-
ing model exhibits overly smoothed responses and shows pronounced deviations from
the baseline (Fig. S2, panels b and d), especially under out-of-sample scenarios. This
indicates that incorporating process-based components with ML methods provides a
more accurate and generalizable representation of soil hydrological processes.
39
C Data
C.1 Initial conditions
Before simulating managed croplands, process-based vegetation models usually need
spin-up simulations to develop equilibrium vegetation and soil states. LPJmL involves
a two-stage spin-up process. The first spin-up simulation typically runs for 5000 years
until all system states (i.e., soil carbon, nitrogen, and water pools) reach equilibrium.
The second spin-up simulation typically spans 390 years to introduce the impacts
of land-use change on these pools driven by historical human activities [21]. Since
NeuralCrop does not simulate natural vegetation, it can not perform this spin-up
procedure prior to crop simulations. We therefore perform the spin-up in LPJmL
and initialize the soil carbon, nitrogen, and water pools in NeuralCrop from LPJmL
simulations to ensure physically consistent initial conditions.
C.2 Pre-training data
Due to the limited availability of large-scale high-resolution observations for crop-
land carbon, water, and nitrogen dynamics, NeuralCrop is pre-trained on simulation
data (Table S1) generated by LPJmL. This pre-training step allows NeuralCrop to
learn prior knowledge from LPJmL and provides a strong initialization for subsequent
training under data-scarce conditions. The LPJmL inputs are shown in Table S2.
Table S1 Training data generated by LPJmL.
Variable
Symbol
Dimension
Units
Time
Inter-cellular to atmospheric CO2 ratio
λ
1
-
daily
Maximum Rubisco capacity
Vmax
1
g C m−2
daily
Gross primary productivity
GPP
1
g C m−2
daily
Crop carbon pools
Ci
4
g C m−2
daily
Litter carbon pools
Clitter(l)
3
g C m−2
daily
Soil fast carbon pools
Cfast(l)
5
g C m−2
daily
Soil slow carbon pools
Cslow(l)
5
g C m−2
daily
Litter nitrogen pools
Nlitter(l)
3
g N m−2
daily
Soil fast nitrogen pools
Nfast(l)
5
g N m−2
daily
Soil slow nitrogen pools
Nslow(l)
5
g N m−2
daily
Soil water pools
W(l)
5
mm
daily
C.3 Fine-tuning data
During the fine-tuning stage, the training of NeuralCrop is focused on optimizing
the ML components with real-world observations. The fine-tuning data were obtained
from the global flux network FLUXNET, the American flux network AmeriFlux, and
the European Integrated Carbon Observation System (ICOS), which provide site-level
daily crop and soil eddy covariance flux as well as meteorological forcing measurements.
Table S3 shows the observational data used during the fine-tuning stage. After the
40
Table S2 LPJmL inputs.
Type
Variable
Units
Time
Climate
Temperature
◦C
daily
Climate
Maximum temperature
◦C
daily
Climate
Minimum temperature
◦C
daily
Climate
Precipitation
mm
daily
Climate
Net longwave radiation
W/m2
daily
Climate
Downward shortwave radiation
W/m2
daily
Climate
Wind speed
m min−1
daily
Climate
CO2
ppmv
annual
Soil
Soil texture
-
static
Soil
Soil PH
-
static
Management
Land use
-
annual
Management
Nitrogen fertilizer
g N m−2
annual
Management
Tillage
-
annual
Management
Residue on field
-
annual
Management
Sowing date
-
static
Management
Heat unit requirements
-
static
Coordinate
Land sea mask
◦C
static
pre-training stage, NeuralCrop is able to reproduce the dynamics of LPJmL, but also
inherits its structural and knowledge biases. To address that, we optimize the param-
eters of the relevant ML components of NeuralCrop using data from flux networks,
while freezing the remaining ML components.
Table S3 Flux network observational data.
Type
Variable
Symbol
Units
Time
Feature
Air temperature
TAF
◦C
daily
Feature
Precipitation
PF
mm
daily
Feature
Downward shortwave radiation
SWIN F
W/m2
daily
Feature
Downward longwave radiation
LWIN F
W/m2
daily
Feature
Upward longwave radiation
LWOUT
W/m2
daily
Feature
CO2
CO2F MDS
µmol mol−1
daily
Label
Gross primary productivity
GPPNT VUT REF
g C m−2
daily
Label
Ecosystem Respiration
RECONT VUT REF
g C m−2
daily
Label
Soil water content,
SWCF MDS #
%
daily
# denotes soil depth index, higher values represent deeper layers (1 is the shallowest).
C.4 Data pre-processing
The flux networks provide both daytime and nighttime partitioned GPP and
RECO [22, 23]. The nighttime method estimates RECO by fitting a respiration-
temperature function using nighttime data and derives GPP as the difference between
modeled RECO and daytime net ecosystem exchange (NEE). Because photosynthesis
is negligible at night, RECO is approximately equal to NEE. The daytime method
41
fits a light-response function to estimate GPP and a respiration-temperature function
for RECO using daytime and nighttime data. As a result, both GPP and RECO are
estimated by NEE, which introduces coupled uncertainties. Therefore, we use night-
time partitioned GPP and RECO for fine-tuning. The nighttime partitioned GPP and
RECO may contain negative values. We replace negative GPP and RECO with their
daytime counterparts to avoid introducing an additional bias during fine-tuning.
The soil water content across flux tower sites is not standardized in the number of
soil layers and their depth, which poses a challenge for consistent model training. To
address this, we converted the soil water distribution into the five-layer structure used
in NeuralCrop by aggregating or interpolating soil water data based on depth-weighted
proportions aligned with the relative thicknesses of the NeuralCrop soil layers.
42
D Training
D.1 Input data normalization
All input features are standardized before being joined together and passed to the
neural networks. We normalize climate forcings distributed with zero mean and unit
variance to improve training stability. Specifically, for each climate forcing variable x,
we compute the standardized value ˜x as:
˜x = x −µ
σ
,
(S21)
where µ is the mean and σ is the standard deviation computed from the 20-year
historical climatology. For input features generated by NeuralCrop itself, we rescale
them to the [0, 1] range using their physical upper and lower bounds. Here, for each
state variable x, the normalized value ˜x is computed as:
˜x =
x −xlower
xupper −xlower
,
(S22)
where xlower and xupper denote the physical lower and upper limits of the variable,
respectively.
D.2 Optimizer settings
All NeuralCrop models were pre-trained using the AdamW optimizer [24]. We used
values β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, and ϵ = 10−6 based on empirical evidence from prior
experiments. The initial learning rate was set to 1 × 10−3. A sinusoidal exponential
decay scheme (SinExp) was employed to dynamically adjust the learning rate through-
out training, oscillating between 1 × 10−3 and 1 × 10−5 with a decay factor of 0.975
and a cycle period of 20 epochs. The only exception to these hyperparameters in fine-
tuning was that the initial learning rate was set to 1×10−4. All models were trained for
100 epochs using batch sizes 32, 64, 128, 256. We empirically selected the configuration
that produced the most stable decrease in validation loss over time.
D.3 Loss function
All NeuralCrop models are trained in two stages (pre-training and fine-tuning) with
different loss functions, where all loss terms are defined in the general form of mean
squared error (MSE):
MSE = 1
T
T
X
t=1
(ˆyt −yt)2 ,
(S23)
where ˆyt is the model simulation at time t, yt is the corresponding observation, and
T is the total number of time steps.
43
During the pre-training stage, we employed a combination of two loss types (i.e.,
accuracy and mass balance) to minimize two kinds of discrepancies between Neural-
Crop and LPJmL outputs. The loss term of accuracy accounts for the distance between
predictions and reference data, and the loss term of mass balance constrains the car-
bon conservation during crop carbon allocation. The pre-training loss function has
two kinds of loss types:
LPre-training =
X
i∈T
βaccuracy,iMAccuracy,i + βmassMMassBalance,
(S24)
where T denotes the set of loss terms of accuracy (i.e., λ, Vmax, GPP, carbon and nitro-
gen pools, soil water pools), MAccuracy,i is the MSE between NeuralCrop prediction
and reference data of variable i with corresponding loss scales βaccuracy,i, MMassBalance
is the MSE between the sum of crop carbon and accumulated above-ground biomass
with a loss scale βmass.
After the pre-training stage, NeuralCrop was further fine-tuned with real-world
observational data (i.e., the eddy-covariance flux data) to reduce the gap between
model outputs and ground truth. During this stage, we only updated the ML compo-
nents that correspond to variables with available observations (C.3). Here is the loss
function:
LFine-tuning = βgppMGPP + βrecoMRECO + βswcMSWC,
(S25)
where MGPP, MRECO, and MSWC denote the MSE on GPP, RECO, and SWC,
scaled by βgpp, βreco, and βswc, respectively.
D.4 Training sequence length
To investigate the required length of time series data for effective training, we trained
several NeuralCrop models with identical parameters using time series data ranging
from 1 to 20 years in length. We find that two years of data were sufficient to train
NeuralCrop effectively. We further investigated two training strategies. The first strat-
egy used 80% of the time series samples from two years for training and the remaining
20% for validation. The second strategy used the time series samples from the first two
years for training, with the third year for validation. We found that both strategies
yielded comparable performance.
D.5 Training rollouts
To explore the benefits of training with different rollouts (i.e., how many simulation
days to update ML parameters), we trained the NeuralCrop models with identical
model parameters on rollouts of 1, 30, 60, 180, 365, and 720 days (Fig. S3). We find that
NeuralCrop trained on longer rollouts leads to significantly more stable convergence
during training. In contrast, NeuralCrop trained on shorter rollouts, especially 1 day,
exhibits large oscillations in both training and validation loss during the entire training
period. The rollout of 365 days leads to the most stable and smooth convergence.
44
We attribute this to the fact that a 365-day rollout covers the complete crop growth
cycle, which enables ML components to learn complete seasonal dynamics in a single
rollout. Although the rollout of 720 days also exhibits similarly stable convergence,
the longer sequence length results in deeper computational graphs, increasing both
memory usage and time costs of backpropagation. Therefore, we set a 365-day rollout
as the default to train all NeuralCrop models.
Fig. S3 NeuralCrop models with identical model parameters trained on rollouts of 1, 30, 60, 180,
365, and 720 days (a-f).
45
D.6 Output rescaling
All variables predicted by neural networks during training are rescaled using their his-
torical minimum and maximum values over the training years, which prevents variables
with large magnitudes from dominating the training. Specifically, for each predicted
variablex, the normalized value ˜x is computed as:
˜x =
x −xmin
xmax −xmin
,
(S26)
where xmin and xmax denote the minimum and maximum values of the variable,
respectively.
D.7 Training resources
All training and inference of NeuralCrop were conducted using a single NVIDIA H100
GPU with 80GB of memory.
We compared the efficiency of inference time between GPU-accelerated NeuralCrop
and CPU-based LPJmL by running them on a 0.5◦× 0.5◦spatial resolution with
daily time steps over a 20-year simulation period (7300 days) at different grid cells
(Table S4). The LPJmL was running on one single AMD EPYC 9554 CPU with 128
cores and 768GB of memory. The results show that LPJmL takes over 7,500 seconds
(about 2 hours) to simulate 14,157 grid cells, whereas NeuralCrop completes the exact
simulation in 91 seconds, over 82 times faster. Similar gains appear at smaller grid
cells, with 60 times faster for 7,865 grid cells and 16 times faster for 1,573 grid cells.
Although GPU overhead makes the one-cell simulation slower, the efficiency increases
rapidly with scale, reflecting the powerful parallel capacity of the GPU. This allows
NeuralCrop to achieve competitive speed compared to traditional GGCM running on
multiple CPU cores when doing global and daily simulations.
Table S4 Inference time of GPU-accelerated NeuralCrop and
CPU-based LPJmL simulating for a 0.5◦× 0.5◦spatial resolution
with daily time steps over a 20-year simulation period (7300 days)
at different grid cells. NeuralCrop was running on one single
NVIDIA H100 GPU with 80GB of memory, and LPJmL was
running on one single AMD EPYC 9554 CPU with 128 cores and
768GB of memory.
Grid cells
LPJmL
NeuralCrop
Times (speed up)
1
0.50 s
46.01 s
0.011x
1573
833.99 s
51.24 s
16.27x
7865
4169.94 s
70.02 s
59.55x
14157
7505.89 s
91.16 s
82.33x
46
E Evaluation metrics
Evaluation metrics compare model simulations with ground truth. In this study, our
preferred evaluation metrics include root mean square error (RMSE) and Pearson
correlation coefficient (r).
E.1 Pearson correlation coefficient
Pearson correlation coefficient (r) calculates the linear relationship between model
simulations and observations. It is defined as:
r =
PT
t=1(yt −¯y)(ˆyt −¯ˆy)
qPT
t=1(yt −¯y)2
qPT
t=1(ˆyt −¯ˆy)2
,
(S27)
where ˆyt and yt represent the simulated and observed values at time t, respectively,
while ¯ˆy and ¯y denote their mean values. It ranges from −1 to +1, with higher values
indicating stronger agreement in the temporal variability. In particular, r is used to
assess the ability of models to reproduce seasonal and interannual variations.
E.2 Coefficient of determination
Coefficient of determination (R2) quantifies the proportion of the variance in the
benchmark yield time series that is predictable from the model simulations, which is
defined as the square of the Pearson correlation coefficient (r) between the simulated
and benchmark yields:
R2 = r2
(S28)
E.3 Root mean square error
Root mean square error (RMSE) is a widely used metric to evaluate the accuracy of
model predictions against observations. It is defined as the square root of the average
of the squared differences between predicted values and observed values:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
T
T
X
t=1
(ˆyt −yt)2,
(S29)
where ˆyt is the model simulation at time t, yt is the corresponding observation, and
T is the total number of time steps. A lower RMSE value indicates better agreement
between model simulations and observations.
47
F In situ validation
F.1 In situ sites
To evaluate the performance of NeuralCrop across different crop types and environ-
ments, we conducted in situ validation using observational data from four crop flux
tower sites (Table S5 and Fig. S4), selected to represent wheat, rice, corn, and soy-
bean cropping regions. These are four global staple crops, spanning diverse climate
zones, management practices, and phenological patterns, making them suitable cases
for evaluating the performance of NeuralCrop. Each site provides high-quality daily
eddy covariance measurements of carbon (i.e., GPP, RECO, and NEE) and soil water
fluxes (SWC), as well as measurements of meteorological variables (Table S3).
Table S5 Overview of crop flux tower sites used for NeuralCrop validation.
Site
Crop
Country
(latitude, longitude)
Year
Source
CH-Oe2 [25]
Wheat
Swiss
(47.2864, 7.7337)
2004-2023
ICOS
KR-CRK [26]
Rice
South Korea
(38.2013, 127.2506)
2005-2018
FLUXNET
US-Mo3 [27]
Soybean
USA
(39.2322, -92.1493)
2016-2021
AmeriFlux
US-Ne1 [28]
Corn
USA
(39.2322, -92.1493)
2001-2020
AmeriFlux
Fig. S4 Geographical locations of the four FLUXNET sites used for in situ validation of NeuralCrop.
Each site corresponds to a different crop: wheat (CH-Oe2), rice (KR-CRK), corn (US-Ne1), and
soybean (US-Mo3).
F.2 Training
We first train four NeuralCrop models for the above four crop sites separately using
LPJmL outputs spanning from 2004 to 2017. Each NeuralCrop model is then fine-
tuned with corresponding observational data (i.e., GPP, RECO, NEE, and SWC).
The training setup can be found in Section C and Section D. Since crop rotation is
practiced at these sites, we excluded flux data from non-target crop years and retained
48
only the data of periods during which the target crop was growing. We use the last
year of data for validation and the remaining years for training (or fine-tuning). To
evaluate the model performance, we use the root mean square error (RMSE, Eq. S29)
and the Pearson correlation coefficient (r, Eq. S27) to assess both the accuracy and
the ability of models to reproduce seasonal and interannual variations.
F.3 Results
We compare the daily predictions of GPP, RECO, NEE, and SWC from NeuralCrop
and LPJmL against FLUXNET observations across all four crop sites. Results indicate
that NeuralCrop models outperform LPJmL models (see Figs. S5-S7 and Table S6).
For GPP, NeuralCrop consistently achieves lower RMSE values (1.38–1.62) compared
to LPJmL (2.06–2.85), with correlations up to 0.98, indicating a more accurate repro-
duction of seasonal cycles and peak flux magnitudes. Similarly, for RECO, NeuralCrop
significantly reduces RMSE (0.89–1.74) relative to LPJmL (1.36–2.57), and achieves
higher correlations (0.79–0.97 vs. 0.68–0.95), demonstrating its improved capabil-
ity to capture respiration dynamics. For NEE, NeuralCrop not only yields smaller
errors (1.15–1.66 vs. 1.66–2.73 for LPJmL) but also stronger correlations (0.90–0.95
vs. 0.83–0.94), highlighting its ability to better capture the timing and magnitude of
transitions between carbon sink and source. For SWC, NeuralCrop reduces RMSE
(14.51–37.30) relative to LPJmL (14.90–37.68) at all sites, while correlations are site-
dependent with NeuralCrop outperforming LPJmL at KR-CRK but showing slightly
lower correlations at the other sites.
Overall, these results suggest that NeuralCrop performs well across diverse crop
types and climatic zones, with consistently better performance in carbon flux sim-
ulations and comparable performance in soil water simulations compared to the
traditional process-based crop model LPJmL. The improved performance of Neural-
Crop highlights its potential as a reliable tool for assessing the impacts of climate
change on crop productivity.
49
Fig. S5 Comparison between FLUXNET observations and model simulations (NeuralCrop and
LPJmL) for the wheat site (CH-Oe2) over four years. Time series are shown for (a–b) gross primary
productivity (GPP, gC m−2 day−1), (c–d) ecosystem respiration (RECO, gC m−2 day−1), (e–f) net
ecosystem exchange (NEE, gC m−2 day−1), and (g–h) soil water content (SWC, mm). Panels (a,
c, e, g) compare FLUXNET with NeuralCrop, while panels (b, d, f, h) compare FLUXNET with
LPJmL. Blue lines represent FLUXNET data, red lines represent NeuralCrop simulations, and green
lines represent LPJmL simulations.
50
Fig. S6 Comparison between FLUXNET observations and model simulations (NeuralCrop and
LPJmL) for the rice site (KR-CRK) over four years. Time series are shown for (a–b) gross primary
productivity (GPP, gC m−2 day−1), (c–d) ecosystem respiration (RECO, gC m−2 day−1), (e–f) net
ecosystem exchange (NEE, gC m−2 day−1), and (g–h) soil water content (SWC, mm). Panels (a,
c, e, g) compare FLUXNET with NeuralCrop, while panels (b, d, f, h) compare FLUXNET with
LPJmL. Blue lines represent FLUXNET data, red lines represent NeuralCrop simulations, and green
lines represent LPJmL simulations.
51
Fig. S7 Comparison between FLUXNET observations and model simulations (NeuralCrop and
LPJmL) for the soybean site (US-Mo3) over four years. Time series are shown for (a–b) gross primary
productivity (GPP, gC m−2 day−1), (c–d) ecosystem respiration (RECO, gC m−2 day−1), (e–f) net
ecosystem exchange (NEE, gC m−2 day−1), and (g–h) soil water content (SWC, mm). Panels (a,
c, e, g) compare FLUXNET with NeuralCrop, while panels (b, d, f, h) compare FLUXNET with
LPJmL. Blue lines represent FLUXNET data, red lines represent NeuralCrop simulations, and green
lines represent LPJmL simulations.
52
Fig. S8 Comparison between FLUXNET observations and model simulations (NeuralCrop and
LPJmL) for the corn site (US-Ne1) over four years. Time series are shown for (a–b) gross primary
productivity (GPP, gC m−2 day−1), (c–d) ecosystem respiration (RECO, gC m−2 day−1), (e–f) net
ecosystem exchange (NEE, gC m−2 day−1), and (g–h) soil water content (SWC, mm). Panels (a,
c, e, g) compare FLUXNET with NeuralCrop, while panels (b, d, f, h) compare FLUXNET with
LPJmL. Blue lines represent FLUXNET data, red lines represent NeuralCrop simulations, and green
lines represent LPJmL simulations.
53
Table S6 Model performance against FLUXNET observations at four crop sites: CH-Oe2 (wheat), KR-CRK (rice), US-Mo3
(soybean), and US-Ne1 (corn). Performance metrics include Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) and Pearson correlation
coefficient (r), calculated for gross primary productivity (GPP), ecosystem respiration (RECO), net ecosystem exchange
(NEE), and soil water content (SWC). Bold numbers indicate the better performance between NeuralCrop and LPJmL.
Variable
Metric
Wheat (CH-Oe2)
Rice (KR-CRK)
Soybean (US-Mo3)
Corn (US-Ne1)
NeuralCrop
LPJmL
NeuralCrop
LPJmL
NeuralCrop
LPJmL
NeuralCrop
LPJmL
GPP
RMSE
1.53
2.51
1.42
2.83
1.38
2.85
1.62
2.06
r
0.96
0.91
0.95
0.90
0.96
0.86
0.98
0.97
RECO
RMSE
1.51
2.57
1.37
2.37
1.74
1.82
0.89
1.36
r
0.79
0.68
0.83
0.77
0.82
0.80
0.97
0.95
NEE
RMSE
1.66
2.73
1.15
1.68
1.57
2.28
1.53
1.66
r
0.92
0.83
0.90
0.87
0.90
0.74
0.95
0.94
SWC
RMSE
22.21
30.58
37.30
37.68
17.55
17.88
14.51
14.90
r
0.67
0.68
0.62
0.53
0.87
0.89
0.32
0.34
54
G Large-scale cropping regions
G.1 European wheat
G.1.1 Subnational crop statistics
We use the harmonized EU subnational crop statistics dataset [29] as ground truth,
which was collected from National Statistical Institutes (NSIs) in EU countries and
the EUROSTAT dataset. This dataset provides primarily county-level, and state-level
in some EU countries, records of production, area, and yield in wheat, including soft,
durum, and total wheat, across 27 EU countries over the period 1975–2020. We used
the total wheat statistics from 2000 to 2019 for model evaluation, which includes 14,910
records for yield, covering a total of 883 regions (specifically, 3 NUTS-1, 69 NUTS-2,
and 811 NUTS-3 statistical regions). In official statistics, wheat yields are reported at
the standard EU humidity (14%). To ensure consistency with model simulations, all
reported wheat yields are converted to dry matter (0% humidity) prior to analysis, as
follows:
YDM = YHM × (1 −h),
(S30)
where YDM is the yield at 0% humidity, YHM is the yield at the standard humidity,
and h is the standard humidity fraction.
G.1.2 Pre-training
In the European wheat cropping regions, we pre-trained NeuralCrop models using
LPJmL outputs from 2016-1-1 to 2017-12-31 to simulate winter wheat varieties under
rain-fed and irrigated management conditions, and outputs from 2016-1-1 to 2016-
12-31 to simulate spring wheat varieties under rain-fed and irrigated management
conditions, respectively. The initial states of the NeuralCrop models were derived from
the LPJmL simulations on the last day of 2015, ensuring consistent soil water, carbon,
and nitrogen conditions at the beginning of the training period. The training setup
can be found in Section C and Section D.
To ensure the pre-trained NeuralCrop is adequately prepared for the subsequent
fine-tuning phase, we compared simulated wheat yields from NeuralCrop and LPJmL
for the period 2000-2019 at the subnational level. The simulated yields are aggregated
to subnational units using an area-weighted average method, described in Section H.1.
Fig. S9 shows that pre-trained NeuralCrop and LPJmL exhibit a strong agreement
in their simulated wheat yields at the subnational level. The correlation coefficients
are consistently high (mean values predominantly above 0.8) across all EU countries.
This robust correlation confirms that the pre-trained NeuralCrop effectively learned
and reproduced the wheat yield behavior of LPJmL.
55
Fig. S9 Boxplots of time series correlation coefficient of simulated wheat yields between pre-trained
NeuralCrop and LPJmL at the subnational level, aggregated by country for the period 2000–2019,
with countries ordered alphabetically by their country code (A–Z). The box boundaries represent
the interquartile range (IQR), defined by the first quartile, the median, and the third quartile. The
upper and lower whiskers represent the maximum and minimum values that are within 1.5 times the
interquartile range of the box. The black triangles are the mean value.
G.1.3 Fine-tuning
NeuralCrop models were further fine-tuned using site-level eddy-covariance flux tower
data across major European wheat cropping regions. The wheat flux data comprised
12 flux tower sites distributed in Belgium, Switzerland, Germany, France, and Italy
(see Table S7 and Fig. S10), covering a broad range of climatic and management
conditions. These observations provide daily GPP, RECO, NEE, and, for most sites,
SWC, as well as auxiliary meteorological variables, spanning from 2001 to 2023. Since
crop rotation is practiced at most sites, we excluded flux data from non-target crop
years and retained only the data of periods during which the wheat was growing. The
final dataset included a total of 76 site-years of wheat flux observations for fine-tuning.
Table S7 Overview of European wheat flux tower sites used for fine-tuning of
NeuralCrop.
Site
Country
(latitude, longitude)
Year
Source
BE-Lon [30]
Belgium
(50.5516, 4.7462)
2004-2020
ICOS
CH-Oe2 [25]
Switzerland
(47.2864, 7.7337)
2004-2023
ICOS
DE-Geb [31]
Germany
(51.0997, 10.9146)
2001-2020
ICOS
DE-Kli [32]
Germany
(50.8930, 13.5223)
2004-2023
ICOS
DE-RuS [33]
Germany
(50.8659, 6.4471)
2011-2014
ICOS
DE-Seh [34]
Germany
(50.8706, 6.4497)
2001-2010
FLUXNET
DK-Vng [35]
Germany
(56.0374, 9.1607)
2009-2018
ICOS
FR-Gri [36]
France
(48.8442, 1.9519)
2004-2014
FLUXNET
FR-Aur [37]
France
(43.5496, 1.1061)
2005-2023
ICOS
FR-EM2 [38]
France
(49.8721, 3.0206)
2017-2023
ICOS
FR-Lam [39]
France
(43.4964, 1.2378)
2005-2020
ICOS
IT-CA2 [40]
Italy
(42.3772, 12.0260)
2011-2014
ICOS
56
Fig. S10 Geographical locations of the EU wheat flux tower sites used for fine-tuning of NeuralCrop.
G.2 US Corn Belt
G.2.1 County-level crop statistics
In this study, the US Corn Belt includes the states of South Dakota, Minnesota, Iowa,
Missouri, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Michigan, and Wisconsin (shown in Fig. S11) [41].
County-level corn statistics from National Agricultural Statistics Service of USDA are
used as ground truth, which provides records of production, area, and yield in corn,
starting from 1910. We used the corn statistics from 2000 to 2019 for model evaluation,
which includes 13,665 records for yield, covering a total of 764 counties. We also use
the Eq. G.1.1, with h = 0.155, to convert the reported corn yields to dry matter (0%
humidity) before analysis.
57
Fig. S11 States shaded in blue represent the US Corn Belt, including the states of South Dakota,
Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Wisconsin, Illinois, Michigan, Indiana, and Ohio.
G.2.2 Pre-training
In the US Corn Belt cropping regions, we pre-trained NeuralCrop models using LPJmL
outputs from 2016-1-1 to 2016-12-31 to simulate corn under rain-fed and irrigated
management conditions, respectively. The initial states of the NeuralCrop models were
derived from the LPJmL simulations on the last day of 2015, ensuring consistent soil
water, carbon, and nitrogen conditions at the beginning of the training period. The
training setup can be found in Section C and Section D.
Same to EU wheat pre-training, we compared simulated corn yields from Neural-
Crop and LPJmL for the period 2000-2019 at the county level. The simulated yields
are aggregated to counties using an area-weighted average method, described in H.1.
Fig. S12 shows that pre-trained NeuralCrop and LPJmL exhibit a strong agreement in
their simulated corn yields at the county level. The correlation coefficients are consis-
tently high (mean values predominantly above 0.8) across all states of US Corn Belt.
This robust correlation confirms that the pre-trained NeuralCrop effectively learned
and reproduced the corn yield behavior of LPJmL.
58
Fig. S12 Boxplots of time series correlation coefficient of simulated corn yields between pre-trained
NeuralCrop and LPJmL at the county level, aggregated by state for the period 2000–2019. The box
boundaries represent the interquartile range (IQR), defined by the first quartile, the median, and the
third quartile. The upper and lower whiskers represent the maximum and minimum values that are
within 1.5 times the interquartile range of the box. The black triangles are the mean value.
G.2.3 Fine-tuning
NeuralCrop models were further fine-tuned using site-level eddy-covariance flux tower
data across major US corn cropping regions. The corn flux data comprised 10 flux
tower sites distributed in the states of Missouri, Nebraska, Minnesota, and California
(Table S8 and Fig. S13), covering a broad range of climatic and management condi-
tions. These observations provide daily GPP, RECO, NEE, and, for most sites, SWC,
as well as auxiliary meteorological variables, spanning from 2001 to 2023. Since crop
rotation is practiced at most sites, we excluded flux data from non-target crop years
and retained only the data of periods during which the corn was growing. Finally, the
dataset included 26 site-years of corn flux observations for fine-tuning.
Table S8 Overview of US corn flux tower sites used for fine-tuning
of NeuralCrop.
Site
(latitude, longitude)
Year
Source
US-Bi2 [42]
(38.1091, -121.5351)
2017-2021
AmeriFlux
US-Mo1 [43]
(39.2298, -92.1167)
2015-2023
AmeriFlux
US-Mo3 [44]
(39.2322, -92.1493)
2016-2021
AmeriFlux
US-Ne1 [28]
(41.1651, -96.4766)
2001-2020
AmeriFlux
US-Ne2 [45]
(41.1649, -96.4701)
2001-2013
AmeriFlux
US-Ne3 [46]
(41.1797, -96.4397)
2001-2013
AmeriFlux
US-Ro1 [47]
(44.7143, -93.0898)
2004-2016
AmeriFlux
US-Ro3 [48]
(44.7217, -93.0893)
2004-2007
AmeriFlux
US-Ro5 [49]
(44.6910, -93.0576)
2017-2023
AmeriFlux
US-Ro6 [50]
(44.6946, -93.0578)
2017-2023
AmeriFlux
59
Fig. S13 Geographical locations of the US corn flux tower sites used for fine-tuning NeuralCrop.
G.3 Out-of-sample generalization
Pure ML models typically exhibit poor performance in out-of-sample conditions, and
even produce physically inconsistent predictions. We anticipate that NeuralCrop may
generalize well in unseen conditions because of its hybrid modelling approach, where
neural networks are used only to replace or augment selected sub-processes while
simultaneously being constrained by other, explicitly resolved processes. To validate
this hypothesis, we compared NeuralCrop with pure ML models (i.e., neural networks
in the form of multi-layer perceptrons) that were trained on the European wheat
cropping regions and used to simulate the US wheat cropping regions (including the
states of Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Colorado, Kansas, Okla-
homa, and Texas) (Fig. S15), respectively, a scenario entirely unseen during training.
The simulated wheat yields are aggregated from the 0.5◦× 0.5◦(latitude × longi-
tude) grid to the county level using area-weighted averaging, as shown in H.1. Results
demonstrate that NeuralCrop presents robust spatial generalization capabilities, even
outperforming the fully process-based LPJmL model in six out of eight states, with
comparable performance in the remaining two (Fig. S14). In contrast, the pure ML
model shows significantly weaker predictive skills across all states. This indicates that
our hybrid NeuralCrop model provides a promising approach for accurate simulation
of large-scale agricultural systems where observational data is scarce.
The European wheat statistics were downloaded from https://data.jrc.ec.europa.
eu/dataset/685949ff-56de-4646-a8df-844b5bb5f835, which provides annual wheat
statistics on area, production, and average yield across three levels of the Nomencla-
ture of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS). The US wheat statistics were obtained
from https://quickstats.nass.usda.gov/.
60
Fig. S14 Comparison of simulated wheat yields from NeuralCrop, LPJmL, and MLP with USDA
statistics in the US Corn Belt, including nine states, including eight states (i.e., Montana, North
Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Colorado, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas). Simulated wheat yields
are aggregated from the 0.5◦× 0.5◦(latitude × longitude) grid to the county level using area-weighted
averaging. a, Time series correlation coefficient between NeuralCrop simulated corn yield and USDA
statistics at the county level for the period 2000-2007 (range from −1 to 1, darker green areas indicate
stronger positive correlations, and darker purple areas indicate stronger negative correlations). b,
Same as panel a, but for LPJmL. c, Same as panel a, but for MLP. d, The difference of correlation
coefficients between NeuralCrop and LPJmL (i.e., panel a – panel b), where blue areas indicate regions
where NeuralCrop outperforms LPJmL in simulating interannual yield variability, and red areas
indicate regions where LPJmL performs better. e, Same as panel d, but for the difference between
NeuralCrop and MLP (i.e., panel a – panel c). f, Boxplots of time series correlation coefficients
between simulated wheat yield and USDA statistics at the country level, aggregated by states for
the period 2000-2007. Blue boxes represent LPJmL, orange boxes represent NeuralCrop, and green
boxes represent MLP. The box boundaries represent the interquartile range (IQR), defined by the first
quartile, the median, and the third quartile. The upper and lower whiskers represent the maximum
and minimum values that are within 1.5 times the interquartile range of the box. The black triangles
are the mean value.
61
Fig. S15 States shaded in blue represent the US main wheat regions, including the states of Mon-
tana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Colorado, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas.
G.4 SPEI
The Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) is a drought index
that combines precipitation (P) and potential evapotranspiration (PET) [51]. It
can be used to characterize drought intensity, duration, and frequency across differ-
ent timescales, thereby providing a consistent framework to assess water availability
impacts on agriculture. SPEI is defined as the difference between Pt and PETt at time
t:
Dt = Pt −PETt,
(S31)
where
PETt
is
calculated
using
Priestley-Taylor
equation,
following
LPJmL
scheme [10]. The accumulated water balance over a timescale of k months is then given
by:
Dt,k =
k−1
X
i=0
(Pt−i −PETt−i),
(S32)
where Dt,k represents the climatic water balance integrated over k months. The series
Dt,k is fitted to a probability distribution (typically Logistic) and transformed into
a standardized normal variable with mean zero and unit variance. The standardized
index is expressed as:
SPEIt,k = Dt,k −µ
σ
,
(S33)
where µ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the fitted distribution, respec-
tively. Negative values of SPEIt,k indicate drier conditions than normal, while positive
values indicate wetter conditions than normal.
62
In this study, SPEI is calculated using an accumulation period of k = 3 months.
We select SPEI during key crop growth stages to assess water availability relevant to
crop production. Based on calculated SPEI values, drought severity is categorized into
four classes:
Table S9 Dryness classification based on
SPEI.
Value
Classification
1.5 ≤SPEI ≤∞
Extremely Wet
1.0 ≤SPEI ≤1.5
Very Wet
0.5 ≤SPEI ≤1.0
Moderately Wet
−0.5 ≤SPEI ≤0.5
Normal
−1.0 ≤SPEI < −0.5
Moderately Dry
−1.5 ≤SPEI < −1.0
Very Dry
−∞≤SPEI < −1.5
Extremely Dry
63
H Yield data processing
H.1 Yield aggregation
NeuralCrop and LPJmL simulate yields on a global grid at 0.5◦× 0.5◦(latitude
× longitude) spatial resolution, whereas reported yields are usually available at the
county level or for even larger administrative units. To make the simulated yields
comparable with these observations, we first linearly downscale the 0.5◦outputs to a
finer 0.05◦grid by uniformly assigning the original cell value to all sub-cells, and then
aggregate the 0.05◦yields to target regions using the harvested-area weighted method,
see below.
Let Hj,t denote the harvested area of the target crop in 0.05◦grid j and year t.
For a region r (e.g., county, state, or country), the harvested-area weighted mean yield
¯yr,t is computed as
¯yr,t =
X
j∈r
αj,t y0.05
j,t ,
αj,t =
Hj,t
P
j∈r Hj,t
,
(S34)
where αj,t is the fraction of the regional harvested area located in grid cell j.
H.2 Yield detrending
To remove the effects of long-term improvements associated with crop breeding and
management while retaining interannual variability primarily driven by climate fluc-
tuations, we use smoothing splines to detrend the simulated and observed yield time
series. Given time series (t, yt), t = 1, 2, . . . , T, where t denotes the year and yt repre-
sents the corresponding crop yield (either simulated or observed), the smoothing spline
estimate ˆf(x) of the function f(t) is obtained by minimizing the following objective
function:
T
X
i=1
(yt −f(t))2 + λ
Z
[f ′′(t)]2 dt,
(S35)
where the first term, PT
i=1(yt −f(t))2, measures the lack of fit to the data, the second
term,
R
[f ′′(t)]2 dt, penalizes curvature of the function, thereby enforcing smoothness,
and λ (≥0) is the smoothing parameter, which controls the trade-off between goodness
of fit and smoothness. The optimal solution f(x) is a cubic spline function. As λ →
0, the solution approaches an interpolating spline, exactly passing through all data
points. As λ →∞, the solution converges to a linear function, representing complete
smoothing. In this study, the smoothing parameter λ is selected empirically based on
the characteristics of the yield time series. The detrended yield time series is then
obtained as:
ydetrended
t
= yt −ˆf(t).
(S36)
64
H.3 Yield anomalies
Yield anomalies are calculated to measure the relative deviation of annual yields from
their long-term trends. Specifically, given the simulated or observed yield yt in year t
and the corresponding expected yield ˆf(t) estimated by a smoothing spline function
(Section H.2), the normalized yield anomaly is defined as:
ˆat = yt −ˆf(t)
ˆf(t)
.
(S37)
65
I Additional information
I.1 Case study
Fig. S16 Wheat yield anomaly patterns across compound drought–heat conditions in European
wheat regions during the 2018 drought. a-c, Scatter plots of wheat yield anomaly (%) versus Stan-
dardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) and growing-season maximum temperature
for (a) EU statistics, (b) NeuralCrop, and (c) LPJmL at the subnational level. Point colors represent
yield anomalies, with red indicating negative anomalies (yield losses) and blue indicating positive
anomalies (yield gains).
66
Fig. S17 Wheat yield anomaly patterns across compound drought–heat conditions in the US Corn
Belt during the 2012 drought. a-d, Scatter plots of wheat yield anomaly (%) versus SPEI and growing-
season maximum temperature for (a) USDA statistics, (b) NeuralCrop, (c) LPJmL, and (d) the
AgMIP (the ensemble median of 8 GGCMs) at the county level. Point colors represent yield anomalies,
with red indicating negative anomalies (yield losses) and blue indicating positive anomalies (yield
gains).
67
I.2 France wheat anomalies in 2016
Fig. S18 Wheat yield anomalies and model performance for NeuralCrop and LPJmL under the
2016 heavy rainfall in France. a, Wheat yield anomalies in 2016 at the subnational level from EU
statistics. b, Wheat yield anomalies in 2016 at the subnational level from LPJmL. c, Wheat yield
anomalies in 2016 at the subnational level from pre-trained NeuralCrop. d, Wheat yield anomalies
in 2016 at the subnational level from NeuralCrop. e, Boxplots of 2016 wheat yield anomalies (%).
The green box denotes EU statistics, the yellow box denotes pre-trained NeuralCrop, the orange box
denotes NeuralCrop, and the blue box denotes LPJmL. The upper and lower whiskers represent the
maximum and minimum values that are within 1.5 times the interquartile range of the box. The
black triangles are the mean value. f, Root mean square error (RMSE) between simulated 2016 yield
anomalies and EU statistics. The yellow box denotes pre-trained NeuralCrop, the orange box denotes
NeuralCrop, and the blue box denotes LPJmL.
68
References
[1] Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud.
Neural ordinary differential equations. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 31, 2018.
[2] Jeff Bezanson, Alan Edelman, Stefan Karpinski, and Viral B Shah. Julia: A fresh
approach to numerical computing. SIAM review, 59(1):65–98, 2017.
[3] Christopher Rackauckas, Yingbo Ma, Julius Martensen, Collin Warner, Kirill
Zubov, Rohit Supekar, Dominic Skinner, Ali Ramadhan, and Alan Edelman.
Universal differential equations for scientific machine learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.04385, 2020.
[4] Avik Pal. Lux: Explicit Parameterization of Deep Neural Networks in Julia, April
2023. If you use this software, please cite it as below.
[5] Avik Pal. On Efficient Training & Inference of Neural Differential Equations,
2023.
[6] Michael Innes. Don’t unroll adjoint: Differentiating ssa-form programs. CoRR,
abs/1810.07951, 2018.
[7] Tim Besard, Christophe Foket, and Bjorn De Sutter. Effective extensible pro-
gramming: Unleashing Julia on GPUs.
IEEE Transactions on Parallel and
Distributed Systems, 2018.
[8] Tim Besard, Valentin Churavy, Alan Edelman, and Bjorn De Sutter.
Rapid
software prototyping for heterogeneous and distributed platforms. Advances in
Engineering Software, 132:29–46, 2019.
[9] Valentin Churavy. KernelAbstractions.jl.
[10] Sibyll Schaphoff, Werner von Bloh, Anja Rammig, Kirsten Thonicke, Hester Bie-
mans, Matthias Forkel, Dieter Gerten, Jens Heinke, Jonas J¨agermeyr, J¨urgen
Knauer, et al. Lpjml4–a dynamic global vegetation model with managed land–
part 1: Model description. Geoscientific Model Development, 11(4):1343–1375,
2018.
[11] Graham D Farquhar, S von von Caemmerer, and Joseph A Berry. A biochemical
model of photosynthetic co2 assimilation in leaves of c3 species. planta, 149(1):78–
90, 1980.
[12] Graham D Farquhar and S Von Caemmerer. Modelling of photosynthetic response
to environmental conditions. In Physiological plant ecology II: Water relations
and carbon assimilation, pages 549–587. Springer, 1982.
69
[13] G James Collatz, J Timothy Ball, Cyril Grivet, and Joseph A Berry. Physiolog-
ical and environmental regulation of stomatal conductance, photosynthesis and
transpiration: a model that includes a laminar boundary layer. Agricultural and
Forest meteorology, 54(2-4):107–136, 1991.
[14] G James Collatz, Miquel Ribas-Carbo, and Joseph A Berry.
Coupled
photosynthesis-stomatal conductance model for leaves of c4 plants. Functional
Plant Biology, 19(5):519–538, 1992.
[15] Alex Haxeltine and IC Prentice. A general model for the light-use efficiency of
primary production. Functional Ecology, pages 551–561, 1996.
[16] I Colin Prentice, Martin Heimann, and Stephen Sitch. The carbon balance of the
terrestrial biosphere: Ecosystem models and atmospheric observations. Ecological
Applications, 10(6):1553–1573, 2000.
[17] Yiqi Luo, Yuanyuan Huang, Carlos A Sierra, Jianyang Xia, Anders Ahlstr¨om,
Yizhao Chen, Oleksandra Hararuk, Enqing Hou, Lifen Jiang, Cuijuan Liao, et al.
Matrix approach to land carbon cycle modeling. Journal of Advances in Modeling
Earth Systems, 14(7):e2022MS003008, 2022.
[18] Stephen Sitch, Benjamin Smith, I Colin Prentice, Almut Arneth, Alberte
Bondeau, Wolfgang Cramer, Jed O Kaplan, Samuel Levis, Wolfgang Lucht,
M Thonicke Sykes, et al. Evaluation of ecosystem dynamics, plant geography
and terrestrial carbon cycling in the lpj dynamic global vegetation model. Global
change biology, 9(2):161–185, 2003.
[19] Werner von Bloh, Sibyll Schaphoff, Christoph M¨uller, Susanne Rolinski, Katha-
rina Waha, and S¨onke Zaehle.
Implementing the nitrogen cycle into the
dynamic global vegetation, hydrology, and crop growth model lpjml (version 5.0).
Geoscientific Model Development, 11(7):2789–2812, 2018.
[20] Stefanie Rost, Dieter Gerten, Alberte Bondeau, Wolfgang Lucht, Janine Rohwer,
and Sibyll Schaphoff. Agricultural green and blue water consumption and its
influence on the global water system. Water Resources Research, 44(9), 2008.
[21] Sara Minoli, Jonas J¨agermeyr, Senthold Asseng, Anton Urfels, and Christoph
M¨uller. Global crop yields can be lifted by timely adaptation of growing periods
to climate change. Nature Communications, 13(1):7079, 2022.
[22] Markus Reichstein, Eva Falge, Dennis Baldocchi, Dario Papale, Marc Aubinet,
Paul Berbigier, Christian Bernhofer, Nina Buchmann, Tagir Gilmanov, Andre
Granier, et al. On the separation of net ecosystem exchange into assimilation and
ecosystem respiration: review and improved algorithm. Global change biology,
11(9):1424–1439, 2005.
70
[23] Gilberto Pastorello, Carlo Trotta, Eleonora Canfora, Housen Chu, Danielle
Christianson, You-Wei Cheah, Cristina Poindexter, Jiquan Chen, Abdelrahman
Elbashandy, Marty Humphrey, et al. The fluxnet2015 dataset and the oneflux
processing pipeline for eddy covariance data. Scientific data, 7(1):225, 2020.
[24] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
[25] Nina Buchmann, Lukas Hortnagl, Sabina Keller, and Fabio Turco.
Fluxnet
Product from Oensingen crop, 2003–2023.
https://hdl.handle.net/11676/
lWly2Cb3xiVw8QB-Z1SXWqKx, 2024. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[26] Youngryel Ryu, Minseok Kang, and Jongho Kim.
FLUXNET-CH4 KR-CRK
Cheorwon Rice paddy, Dataset. https://doi.org/10.18140/FLX/1669649, 2020.
Data collected from 2015–2018. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[27] Adam Schreiner-McGraw.
AmeriFlux FLUXNET-1F US-Mo3 LTAR CMRB
Field 3 (CMRB BAU), Ver. 3-5, AmeriFlux AMP, Dataset. https://doi.org/10.
17190/AMF/2229384, 2023. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[28] Andy Suyker. AmeriFlux FLUXNET-1F US-Ne1 Mead - irrigated continuous
maize site, Ver. 4-7, AmeriFlux AMP, (Dataset). https://doi.org/10.17190/AMF/
1871140, 2025. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[29] Giulia Ronchetti, Luigi Nisini Scacchiafichi, Lorenzo Seguini, Iacopo Cerrani, and
Marijn van der Velde. Harmonized european union subnational crop statistics can
reveal climate impacts and crop cultivation shifts. Earth System Science Data,
16(3):1623–1649, 2024.
[30] Fluxnet Product from Lonzee crop, 2004–2020. https://hdl.handle.net/11676/
eo cBxOeMONH2G8z4g0G 60J, 2021. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[31] Fluxnet Product from Gebesee crop, 2001–2020. https://hdl.handle.net/11676/
ICpbHZew62rMezJ0DdGd1QZz, 2021. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[32] Fluxnet Product from Klingenberg crop, 2004–2023.
https://hdl.handle.net/
11676/b8wQzTvW2nkN-mFPaSIO6lad, 2021. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[33] Fluxnet Product from Selhausen Juelich crop, 2011–2014.
https://hdl.handle.
net/11676/HE7Nj8 yV0xTr1zYLvOchSR1, 2021. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[34] Marius Schmidt Karl Schneider.
FLUXNET2015 DE-Seh Selhausen, Dataset.
https://doi.org/10.18140/FLX/1669649, 2020. Data collected from 2015–2018.
Accessed 2025-07-30.
[35] Fluxnet Product from Voulundgaard crop, 2009–2018. https://hdl.handle.net/
11676/Msw4MfzUvAI4JRy4PEXnxRdg, 2024. Accessed 2025-07-30.
71
[36] Pauline Buysse, Brigitte Durand, Jean-Christophe Gueudet, Nicolas Mascher,
Eric Larmanou, Pierre Cellier, and Benjamin Loubet. FLUXNET2015 FR-Gri
Grignon, Dataset. https://doi.org/10.18140/FLX/1669649, 2020. Data collected
from 2004-2014. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[37] Fluxnet Product from Aurade crop, 2005-2023. https://hdl.handle.net/11676/
8VEnzKK7Clppzc7jrXlMFAIc, 2021. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[38] Fluxnet Product from Estrees-Mons A28 crop, 2017-2023. https://hdl.handle.
net/11676/iFrHZC8K -lgFIKzoAQOXoc9, 2021. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[39] Fluxnet Product from Lamasquere crop, 2005-2020.
https://hdl.handle.net/
11676/7WGNEcqpODsIXmZfRvQxboSm, 2021. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[40] Simone Sabbatini, Nicola Arriga, Beniamino Gioli, Dario Papale, Michele Tomas-
succi, and Alessio Boschi.
FLUXNET2015 IT-CA2 Castel d’Asso2, Dataset.
https://doi.org/10.18140/FLX/1440231, 2020. Data collected from 2011–2014.
Accessed 2025-07-30.
[41] Jillian M Deines, Sotirios V Archontoulis, Isaiah Huber, and David B Lobell.
Observational evidence for groundwater influence on crop yields in the united
states. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(36):e2400085121,
2024.
[42] Camilo Rey-Sanchez, Carlos Tianxin Wang, Daphne Szutu, Kyle Hemes, Joseph
Verfaillie, and Dennis Baldocchi.
AmeriFlux FLUXNET-1F US-Bi2 Bouldin
Island corn, Ver. 3-5, AmeriFlux AMP, (Dataset).
https://doi.org/10.17190/
AMF/1871135, 2022. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[43] Adam Schreiner-McGraw.
AmeriFlux FLUXNET-1F US-Mo1 LTAR CMRB
Field 1 (CMRB ASP), Ver. 5-7, AmeriFlux AMP, (Dataset). https://doi.org/10.
17190/AMF/2229382, 2025. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[44] Adam Schreiner-McGraw.
AmeriFlux FLUXNET-1F US-Mo3 LTAR CMRB
Field 3 (CMRB BAU), Ver. 3-5, AmeriFlux AMP, (Dataset). https://doi.org/10.
17190/AMF/2229384, 2023. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[45] Andy Suyker. AmeriFlux FLUXNET-1F US-Ne2 Mead - irrigated maize-soybean
rotation site, Ver. 3-7, AmeriFlux AMP, (Dataset). https://doi.org/10.17190/
AMF/2574638, 2025. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[46] Andy Suyker.
AmeriFlux BASE US-Ne3 Mead - rainfed maize-soybean rota-
tion site, Ver. 19-5, AmeriFlux AMP, (Dataset). https://doi.org/10.17190/AMF/
1246086, 2025. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[47] John Baker and Tim Griffis. AmeriFlux FLUXNET-1F US-Ro1 Rosemount- G21,
Ver. 5-7, AmeriFlux AMP, (Dataset). https://doi.org/10.17190/AMF/1881588,
72
2025. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[48] John Baker and Tim Griffis. AmeriFlux FLUXNET-1F US-Ro3 Rosemount- G19,
Ver. 4-7, AmeriFlux AMP, (Dataset). https://doi.org/10.17190/AMF/2469468,
2025. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[49] John Baker and Tim Griffis.
AmeriFlux FLUXNET-1F US-Ro5 Rosemount
I18 South, Ver. 5-7, AmeriFlux AMP, (Dataset). https://doi.org/10.17190/AMF/
1818371, 2025. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[50] John Baker and Tim Griffis.
AmeriFlux FLUXNET-1F US-Ro6 Rosemount
I18 North, Ver. 5-7, AmeriFlux AMP, (Dataset).
https://doi.org/10.17190/
AMF/1881590, 2025. Accessed 2025-07-30.
[51] Sergio M Vicente-Serrano, Santiago Beguer´ıa, and Juan I L´opez-Moreno. A mul-
tiscalar drought index sensitive to global warming: the standardized precipitation
evapotranspiration index. Journal of climate, 23(7):1696–1718, 2010.
73
